Eamon #128 "Quest of Erebor" Walkthrough by Jared Davis

First of all, here are some notes:

When you get into a battle, some of the dwarves will sometimes run away.
You can COUNT them to see who's missing. In order to find them, go in
any direction from the scene of battle. COUNT DWARVES to see if they're
back. If not, go back to the scene of battle and try another direction.
There are supposed to be thirteen dwarves: THORIN, BALIN, DWALIN, BIFUR,
BOFUR, the infamously fat BOMBUR, NORI, ORI, DORI, FILI, KILI, GLOIN,
and OIN. (What a mouthful!)

The Woodman who you can rescue and Beorn are not important to get, but
they are nice to have in combat.

There are extra battles to be fought outside the Lonely Mountain. None
are important, but if you take the WAIN in the northernmost battle, it's
worth quite a bit when you return to the Main Hall.

Now for the solution...

After the long list of the dwarves, you will see that one member of your
company isn't here. Bilbo. He's over to the east. Please note that if
you go west here, you end the game.

Now go East, and you will find BILBO and a DOE. Also note that instead
of listing all the dwarves, it just says "The Dwarves are here." As far
as I know, the doe is of no use, nor is it harmful, so leave it alone.

Go North a couple times to meet BEORN. SAY HELLO or SAY HELP, and he
will follow you. Or attack you.

Now go South. And then East into the forest. You will immediately meet
two wargs and three orcs. I suggest ATTACKing the WARGs first. After
they're dead, ATTACK the ORCs. After they're dead, look around for any
missing dwarves. Head East from the scene of battle to...

...go to another one. A warg is attacking a poor guy. So, ATTACK this
WARG. Now, TAKE the WOUNDED MAN. You can go South, then East, to a
village where a woodman is. GIVE WOUNDED MAN to the WOODMAN, and you
have a new ally! Now, go back West, North, then West to the scene of
your first battle.

Head North for another battle with a BUNCH of ORCs. Oh, and three WARGs.
Attack either the WARGs or the ORCs first. When you're done, probably a
lot of dwarves have run off, and many of your companions have been
injured.

Well, you can only go East, South, and North. Go South and North first
to pick up any dwarves that ran off, and then go East. Go East again,
and you meet a BEAR you have to ATTACK. Now, head North, then East. Here
is the infamous black river. Go South and LOOK for a BOAT. TAKE the
BOAT. Go East. In the boat some of the dwarves will fall in the river,
so you have to TAKE ALL of the sleeping dwarves. Then head East, and
WAIT until all the sleepyheads wake up. Then head North.

Head East to lose ALL the dwarves. Go South, ATTACK all the SPIDERs,
LOOK, get the SHOVEL, then head South and kill all the spiders. Go East
and kill the spiders here. Get Sting and DIG and GET the HOARD. Go West
and North twice. LOOK for a secret passage East to get into the
Elvenking's Halls.

Head East. further east, the Elvenking is partying. But, nothing
important there. Unless you want the ELVEN KING'S TREASURE. But then,
that'll make 'em mean. It might be wiser to...leave it be... If you did
go, go back West. LOOK for a way Down.

Right now, I'm going to tell you this: THESE ELVES ARE PEACEFUL. YOU
WILL SAVE YOURSELF A LOT OF TROUBLE BY LEAVING THEM ALONE! Okay? Good!

Now that you're down here, go East. Unless you took the treasure...

Go east, ignore the elves, go north and have a LOOK around. Get the
bottle. (Note: it might not be a good idea to get the barrels...) Go
South twice, go Down, go East twice to the end of the hall, then LOOK
for a passage Down. Go North, North, then West. PUT the BOTTLE ON the
TABLE to get the butler and guard "stoned." LOOK for the TRAP DOOR, then
OPEN it. TAKE the KEYS, go East, S, then OPEN DOOR, and go West.

Here's Thorin! He's asleep, but just GET THORIN! Go South, Up, OPEN
DOOR, and go North. Here are more dwarves. GET ALL of them! Go South,
West, OPEN DOOR, North, GET ALL of the dwarves here, South, West, OPEN
DOOR, N, GET ALL the other dwarves, then go South, then Up, then North a
couple of times and TAKE BARRELS. OPEN BARRELS, and PUT THORIN IN
BARREL. The rest of the dwarves will follow suit, as will Bilbo. Go back
to the platform with the (now open) trap door and DROP BARRELS, then go
Down.

Go East three times and OPEN the BARRELS. Go East into Lake Town. Go
North to meet Bard. You can give the Northmen some money to join you. Go
South and East twice to get to the Desolation of Smaug.

Now the important thing is to get inside the Mountain and kill Smaug.
You can just go North from here until you get there. There are other
things to do as well, though, so I will go into those.

Go East to meet three SAGATH warriors. Dispatch of them. Go North into
Dorwinion. You can get some grapes here. Go North again to get some
presents from the Dorwinion people. You can also hire one of them, but
not the other one, unless the other one is killed. If you try to hire
both, the first one you hired will always get the gold. Go North a few
times to fight some WAINRIDERS. I suggest ATTACKing their CAPTAIN first.
Here LOOK and go East twice to meet Dain and his army. You can keep
going North and fight some BALCHOTH, then go West.

There are two ways to enter the Mountain. There's the main entrance and
the secret side door.

MAIN ENTRANCE From here you can go back Down, East, South, South, and
West to get to the main entrance. Go North twice to enter the Mountain.
Go North and Up. Go North and LOOK for a passage West. GET ALL the
things in here. Exit and go North. SAVE here! Go North to meet SMAUG!

SECRET DOOR From the Far North, go as far West as possible. ATTACK the
ARMY of Orcs and Wargs. Go South and Up the Mountain. Look and go Up.
Look for the key. (Get it!) WAIT three times and PUT the KEY into the
HOLE. Go East and Down to meet SMAUG!

Here is a bug that sometimes happens. It will prevent you from leaving
or FLEEing. After Smaug is dead, leave, then go back. For some reason,
doing a LOOK here before leaving the first time will make the program
think Smaug is still alive. You cannot FLEE Smaug, and you cannot leave
a room with enemies in it.

ATTACK SMAUG. After he is dead, go South to avoid the bug. Go back North
and LOOK for the ARKENSTONE and GET it. Head back to the bridge. PUT the
PLANKS on the BRIDGE. Go West twice to return to the Main Hall.