&Mask of the Sun&
&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&

You are Mac Steele, a seasoned archaeologist, adventurer and treasure hunter.
Your latest acquisition: a pre-Columbian artifact from Central America that is
surrounded by legend and intrigue. Delving into the secrets of the artifact, you
discover to your surprise that it may somehow relate to an even more valuable
and coveted artifact: the Mask of the Sun!

Suddenly tragedy strikes. While probing a small crevice of the artifact, a pale
green gas escapes and sends you reeling into unconsciousness. Two days later
doctors are able to temporarily halt the rapid degeneration that your body is
undergoing, but they offer no cure. Your only hope is to locate what may hold
the only clue to a cure: the Mask of the Sun.

Your desperate search for the Mask leads you to the ancient Aztec ruins in
Central Mexico, where you encounter a reality unknown to modern man. You'll be
facing death at every turn as you venture inside ancient pyramids and attempt to
uncover the secrets of a long lost civilization - before it's too late.

The Mask of the Sun will keep you on the edge of your seat for hours. Full use
of the latest innovations in computer graphics and "intelligent" interaction
make this one of the most exciting and challenging adventure games ever.

Mask of the Sun is a classical text adventure with graphics of your
surroundings. I still call it text adventure as the added pictures only help
and you are still being told where you.


&Walkthrough&
&&&&&&&&&&&&&

Exit Plane, Get Map, Enter Jeep, W, Take All, Exit Jeep

Go Hut, Give Food, Exit Hut, Enter Jeep

W, NW, Drop All, Get Bottle, Exit Jeep

Look Behind Statue, Get Head, Place Head On Statue, Enter Jeep

NW, Get All, Exit Jeep

Forward, Go Top, Light Match, Light Lantern, Enter, Shoot (do it quick), Search
Platform, Open Door, Forward, Get Bowl, R, Move Stone,  Wait For The Ghost To
Disappear, Get Bowl, Exit, L, R, Get Bowl, Hit Skeleton With Amulet, Get Bowl,
Get Urn, Place Urn Right Pedestal, Forward, Go Jeep, Enter Jeep

SE, S, W, W

NW, Forward, Forward, Exit Jeep

D, Forward, Forward, Sw (quickly), Jump At The Right Moment, Xotzil, Forward,
Forward, Forward, Place Amulet In Opening, Get Mask, Search Altar, Get Mask,
Back, Wear Mask, Exit, Forward, Coffin, R, L, L, L, R, Forward, L, R, Forward,
L, R, Forward, Forward, R, L, R, R, Forward, R, L, Forward, R, Forward, L, R,
L, R, L, Forward, L, R, Forward, Forward, R, L, R, Forward, L, R, Forward

Wear Mask, L, Give Mask, Play Flute
 
END