
1.  Option-Click in the upper right corner of the game border. 2. 
Control the monk with the Player Two keyboard keys. 3. Press Tab to
switch Monks. 4. Option click in the same spot to return to normal play.


============================================================

 Lode runner  - Apple IIe


Playing the game ---------------- you are a galactic commando deep in 
enemy territory. Power hungry leaders of the repressive bungeling empire
have stolen a fortune in gold from the people by means of an excessive
fast  food taxes. Your task? To infiltrate each of 150 different
treasury rooms, evade the deadly bungeling guards, and recover every
chest of bungeling booty.


To start --------

 keyboard commands:     joystick ------------------     --------- i =
 move up	      up/down/left/right k = move down    0 = dig left j =
 move left 1= dig right l = move right u = dig left o = dig right



Game play --------- To complete a level you must collect all the gold
chests in a scene. You may then climb a ladder to the top of the screen
and enter the next one.



Special keys ------------ ctrl-a  aborts man if stuck without Means of
death, or escape.

 ctrl-j  sets game to joystick mode.

 ctrl-k  sets game to keyboard mode.

 return  displays current high score.

 ctrl-r  terminates current game.

 ctrl-s  toggels sound off/on.

 <--	Slows down overall game speed

 -->	Speeds up overall game speed.

 ctrl-x  flips x-axis on joystick

 ctrl-y  flips y-axis on joystick

 esc	Pause game.

 ctrl-shift-n  advances a level (ctrl-shift-6 on //e)

 ctrl-shift-p  adds additional lives. (ctrl-shift-2 on //e)



Making Your Own Game --------------------

  What To Do        /  How To Do It
  --------------------/------------------ 1. Enter Edit Mode  / Press
  Ctrl-E
                    / From Demo Mode.
--------------------/------------------ 2. Put Initialized  / Press 'i'
From Data Disk Into   / Edit Mode. Disk Drive.      /
--------------------/------------------ 3. Design Your Game / Use
I-J-K-M Keys
                    / To Move Cursor. Use 0-9 To Make Shapes.
--------------------/------------------ 4. Save Your Game   / Press
Ctrl-S --------------------/------------------ 5. Play Your Game   /
Press Ctrl-Q To 
                    / Quit Game 
                    /Generator.
                    / P To Play.
                    / 
                    / 
Lode runner shapes: ------------------- 0	= blank 1	= diggable
floor 2	= undiggable floor 3	= ladder 4	= hand over hand bar
5	= trap door 6	= ladder that appears after getting All the gold.
7	= gold chest 8	= enemy 9	= player



Edit mode keys: --------------- E = edit p = play i = initialize c =
clear m = move s = score


============================================================

119 ====

Move to the right right away.  Land on top of the monk.  Move to your
left run over the ledge (you are now on the ground level) then move to
your right. First drill a hole to your right to trap the monk who is
approaching from your right. Try to do this near the small ladder.  Then
go over him and drill a bunch of holes to kill him.

Then go up the first ladder, run over the goo and wail until a monk you
killed reappears at the top and tries to make his way down.  Jump on top
of him and go into the "cave" on the left.  Get the goods, drill a hole
(as far left as possible) fall down it and wait near the bottom of the
leftmost ladder. A monk will come doen, there is only one hole you can
drill.  Drill it and run over him.

Go to the top of the ladder and then on the highest level and wait for
the monk on the ground you can not drill into.  When he comes up, drill
once, run over him and start drilling so you can get the gold piece in
mid air. When you land, get the rest of the pieces in this area while he
is squirming to get out. Right after he dies, drill out the top to get
into the top left "cave."  By this time, the monk will have died and he
is making his way to the bottom.  Stay in the cave and jump on top of
him then move over to the cave on the right getting its contents.

Wait for him to go around and up the ladder on the right. Jump down and
run where they are.  At this point, it is a little free-for-all.  Note,
you can drill only 4 holes and then run over the monks.  You will not
have room at the bottom to kill them all.

As a final note, to get the top right gold skull, you don't have to
repeat the previous steps.  instead, get the monks to pile up on the
ladder right by it while you are on the rightmost ladder (do this by
staying in the middle of the rightmost ladder whil they die and come
around).  Then go to the top of your ladder, they will go to the top of
the other ladder, and walk right over them.  This does not work if there
is only 1 monk, you need them piled up.




147 ===

If you play level 147 the way it's designed to be played you kill off
the monks and then have to avoid them in the lower 'pit.' There's a way
to avoid that and make it very easy.

Start by grabbing the jackhammer and going up and waiting at the bottom
of the short ladder on the right. Then go to the top of the short ladder
and move to the left. The monks will be coming to the right. You'll beat
them to the middle ladder, so go up it and continue left and they chase
you. When you get to the left short ladder, drill the block to the right
of the 'left short ladder' and go up and get the gold [to the left of
the transporter]. Then tease the monks down the drilled block to your
level and transport out. They can't bother you any more and you can then
use a large bomb to open up a middle hole go go down and work in the
pit.
