                          Waterloo II - Crystalware
                          =========================

Apple Movement
Applesoft 48k
==============

Although many countries were involved in these events we have made coding only
for:

     NATION        COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF
     -----------   -------------------------
     France   F    Emperor Napoleon
     England  E    Duke of Wellington
     Prussia  P    Field Marshal Blucher
     Russia   R    General Barclay de Tolley

     TYPES OF UNITS          DESCRIPTION
     ------------------      -------------------------------
     Infantry        I       Common foot soldiers
     Cavalry         C       Mounted troops
     Foot Artillery  A       Slow moving cannons
     Horse Artillery H       Horse drawn weapons
     Baggage Train   B       Supply column
     Flag (Colors)   F       Nation's flag
     Messenger       M       Courier of battle orders
     General         G       One of fours commanders
     Lancers         L       Special unit lethal to cavalry
     Imperial Guard  N       Napoleon's private guard


For both the Apple and Atari the basic movement commands are identical. The
first letter will be the mnemonic used in coding the instruction. All
instructions must specify which unit is to operated upon. The first part of
the code has two letters and one numeral. This is followed by a dash and a
variety of special commands.

For instance, French Infantry unit #1 would be represented as FI1-/ The
specialized movement commands are described as follows:

M)ove - this moves a unit, a flag, or a baggage train. You may not ford a
        river or pass through mountains. You must define the unit, then type a
        dash, "M" for move and the number of squares you wish to move.
        Movement will be executed in the direction the unit is facing. If you
        attempt to move more squares than is possible for that unit, it will
        move to it's maximum and halt. Infantry can move up to 2 squares,
        while cavalry can move up to 4.

    Example: if you want to move French Cavalry #2 three squares, input
             "FC2-M3"

        Weather conditions, troop morale, and terrain will affect your moves.
        If you are in a forrest and try to advance 2 squares, you will find
        you have used up the same amount of food as if you had gone forward 2
        squares, but you will have only moved 1 square. Commands to move into
        sea or mountains will be ignored. At the start of the battle just the
        French and English troops will be able to move as these are the only
        units you will have access to when the game opens. Details about
        security reinforcements and supplies will be given later.

P)ivot - To change the direction of movement of a unit, you must use the "P"
         command. After defining the unit, typing a dash and "P", you may turn
         "R"ight or "L"eft. The orientation of your unit when under attach
         plays a significant part in the outcome of the engagement.

    Example: To turn Prussian Lancer unit #4 to the right... PL4-PR.

A)ttack - all units, even baggage trains are capable of aggressive action.
          Everything is considered, morale, weapons, and strength, each unit
          can be represented at a particular time by a point value. How
          effectively your combat strength is utilized will be determined in
          great part by whether you choose a frontal, flank, or rear attack on
          your enemy. This attack must always be in the direction you are
          moving.

    Example: You want to attack a unit directly ahead of you and one square
             away with the English Cavalry #6... input EC6-A. You may only
             attack a unit one square away and directly ahead of you.

H)ide - This has the effect of having your unit dive for cover. Naturally it
        makes your troops less vulnerable to attack.

    Example: To order French Infantry #1 to take cover... FI1-H.

U)ncover - This accomplishes the reverse of H)ide. Your forces must be in an
           uncovered position to attack or move. However, you can fire while
           undercover.

    Example: To order you concealed unit to come out in the open... FI1-U.

R)est - Since the game does take into account the time of day, and many
        activities are best performed in daylight, try to take the opportunity
        of darkness to rest. If there are adverse weather conditions, it is
        often good strategy to halt your troops, and instead, use your moves
        on the baggage train.

    Example: To order Prussian Artillery #3 to rest... PH3-R.

        Resting will increase strength and morale. Each five moves represent a
        time period of 6 hours. The periods extend from 6 a.m. - 12 noon, for
        one set of moves, and from 6 p.m. - 12 midnight for the next sequence
        of 5.

F)ire - Cannons may be used by Foot or Horse Artillery, providing you have
        sufficient ammunition and you may direct your fire over the heads of
        your own troops. Ranges vary according to type of cannon and
        ammunition used. The two basic types, ball and grapeshot, differ in
        effectiveness. In actual combat your cannon range is given along with
        the numerical strength of your unit. Since one must be able to fire at
        45 degree increments we have a special system for describing the
        direction of cannonfire.

          8  1  2
           \ | /
          7-- --3
           / | \
          6  5  4

    Example: You want to fire at a unit which is diagonally 2 squares away in
             direction 8. You are using French Artillery #2... FF2-F82.

        The second code refers to a Fire direction of 8, 2 squares distant
        from your cannon. Of course, the greater the range the less damaging the shot.

S)end - There are three special "units" which may be sent: A nation's flag may
        be transferred from one unit to another unit to boost morale; a supply
        train may be sent from one of the four key cities; or a general may
        ride into the front lines. Only each of these units can be used by a
        nation at a time. If the nation is not yet in play it cannot be sent a
        supply train. Each supply train leaving its city of origin is given
        direction by programmed commands and will deliver its goods to the
        first troops it is directed to encounter. But if an enemy troop runs
        across it first, that enemy may sieze the supply train and use the
        supplies for itself. Prussian supplies are sent from Frankfurt, French
        from Paris, Russian from Calais, and English from Brussels.

    Example: You want to send you your French supply train from Paris...
             FB1-S. (although this specifies baggage 1, there never is more
             than one baggage train per nation).

G)roup - This, literally, is a last ditch effort to regroup a scattered unit
         during the game. It may be used only once per unit, and is a move of
         desperation. Morale and fighting strength within that unit will
         double its normal value for one turn, but if the skirmish is lost,
         the unit will lose twice as much; a double or nothing gamble.

    Example: Prussian Cavalry #5 is to be regrouped... PC5-G.

C)harge - This just applies to cavalry. Such a command doubles the attacking
          strength of a unit and also its food an energy usage, as it is
          extremely exhausting to the men. The direction of your charge must
          be the same as your direction of movement. The last number in the
          command sequence is the number of squares away you are charging
          toward your target. Remember, charging a unit of Lancers is nearly
          always fatal to a cavalry unit.

    Example: Order you French Cavalry #4 to charge... FC4-C2.

          This move is an attack command, but unlike other moves it may be
          executed a square at a time in order to slice through an entire
          army. The maximum number of squares you can charge is 4.

Q)uit - Naturally, Waterloo is very difficult to play in one sitting, so we
        have included a save game function. Other games may played then an old
        game recalled. However, only one game may be saved at a time.


MULTI-MOVES
-----------
Moves are put in alternately, 5 at a time, but both sides. At the end of this
cycle, the time is increased by 6 hours and the computer alternately executes
each group of 5 moves. Non-executable moves will be ignored.


APPLE FLASH
===========
It's a little tougher to scan the battlefield on the Apple. A map divided into
sectors numbered 1-16, is included in the Apple version. If you wish to
examine a sector, input "F", return and then key the numbers of the sector. It
will appear along with data about each of your units located there. As each
unit is displayed, its strength and direction of travel fill be flashed.
However, you will not be informed about an enemy unit's strength or direction
of travel. A final push of the space bar will return you to a play mode.



COMBAT NOTES:
=============

Orientation during combat and attack values
-------------------------------------------
1. Frontal Attack  1:1     no change

2. Flank Attack    2:1     attack damage= 2 x attack strength

3. Rear Attack     4:1     attack damage= 4 x attack strength

4. Attack on Fortified     attack damage=
   or Covered Troops       attack strength
                           ---------------
                                  3

5. Cavalry Charge          2 x initial attack strength
                           then normal unless moved
                           away and charged again 2 spaces

6. Fire & Cannonade  Point Blank    G       Ex
   grape - I             2          2x      1:1
   explosive Cannon      4         1:1      1:1
   & Cor.                6          /2      1:1
                                    /4      1:1

A. Weapon strengths - Lance, saber, bayonet, musketry - are figured into
                      combat coeffiency nos.

B. Baggage Train includes: - Food (fatigue)
                           - Repair tools (bridge bldg, cannon repair, carts)
                           - Powder (resupply)
                           - Medical supplies (morale)
                           - Wounded (slowly release back into units or die)
                           - Prisoners, if any (for exchange and information)

C. Artillery - 1. Can fire over troops up to six spaces.
             - 2. Can fire straight or at 45 degrees either side.

TERRAIN
=======
The battlefield for this particular wargame occupies 16 full screen high
resolution graphic pages. There are 25,600 possible combinations for units and
terrain. Landscape may range from an expanse of flat Belgian farmland to the
Black Forrest of Germany. Farther south of the Alps are the Pyrenees, and
a myriad biomes of rolling foothills and rushing rivers.

Different landscape features have their effects on the mobility and sped of
troops as well as on the outcome of an attack. For instances, maneuvering in a
wooded area increases your rate of speed by 2. Attacking a unit that has taken
cover in the woods will increase the force of your attack by 3.

Although the primary battlefield is a flat terrain, its condition of wetness
or dryness will determine the rapidity with which you can move and this will
also increase or decrease combat effectiveness. Following main roads will
enable your troops to maneuver much more quickly. An attempt to take a
shortcut across a muddy field could have some pretty disastrous consequences.

During the course of battle rivers cannot be forded. But gaining access to a
bridge will make it possible for your troops to cross that river. Mountains
may halt progress altogether. You can gain an advantage by cornering an enemy
unit near a river of in front of a mountain.



WEATHER
=======
Waterloo has a variety of weather conditions. During the course of the
historical battle, and onslaught of heavy rain greatly affected the situation
of the combatants. With grassy fields suddenly;y turning into sloshing muddy
expanses the troops and artillery were forced to an exhausting trudge that
drained their vigor and confidence. You will see that an attack launched
during fog, a drizzle, or rain is only half as effective because of the
energy and time lost in fighting in these conditions. High winds multiply our
adverse weather factor by 2 and may cause your cannonshot to end up in some
bizarre places.

As your forces march on the hour, nighttime or daytime, and particular season
are all taken into consideration. While overcast skies may not prove to be a
severe setback to the winning of a skirmish, a night attack is only
one-quarter as effective as the same attack carried on during daylight. As you
near autumn and finally winter, the weather turns more and more miserable.

Should you be unfortunate enough to have the game drag out through the winter,
you will be contending with freezing temperatures, deep snow banks, and a
dropping of morale throughout the ranks. Snow decreases your movement speed by
a factor of 4 and your combat strength by a factor of 3.

With each series of five moves per player the time of day will advance by 6
hours. If you begin your sequence of moves at 6 a.m. you will end them at 12
noon, or if at 12 noon, then they will end at 6 p.m. would end at 12 midnight,
and so on. During temporary bad weather, such as a rainstorm or heavy fog,
your best strategy for conserving strength might be to stay put and rest.



MORALE
======
As we have stressed in our advertisements of this game, morale - psychological
condition of each soldier - plays a significant part in determining the
outcome of every battle. Morale is influenced by weather conditions, fatigue,
the presence or absence of a general or a flag, and insufficient supplies. If
the men are in a safe, covered position, they will be in higher spirits than if
they were situated in the center of a hundred miles of open fields, facing
a division of charging cavalry.

The French as a whole are n much better spirits than the allied forces. They
consider Napoleon to be a god and are highly nationalistic. On the other hand,
their opponents are no very highly motivated. Many of them are mercenaries,
some a considerable distance from their homeland. Often a group of allied
soldiers will speak as many as four different languages, while their commander
speaks another. Desertion is an all too common occurrence.

Be sure that your men receive enough rest, provisions and good medical
attention. If the general moral in a unit falls below 25%, then the soldiers
will desert.



COMMUNICATION
=============
As the battle begins our two generals may communicate only with the French or
English forces; messengers must be sent if you wish to maneuver your
additional troops. Unfortunately a country may just just one messenger at a
time. Once the messenger has been sent out it is possible he may be
intercepted by enemy troops and killed. Prussian and Russian troops must
remain stationary until they have received a message from the allied forces,
and the French reinforcements must wait for word from the Emperor.

Sometimes it is necessary to transfer the "colors" or flag of a nation to
another unit to bolster morale. Even the generals themselves may advance into
the battlefield, although it is unwise for them to do so without sufficient
protection.

One of the biggest problems during the historical battle was a lack of
communication between the divisions of each army. If certain key instructions
had been received by the designated units, Napoleon would have won at
Waterloo. Since in our game the allied armies have a  combined total of 3
messengers, whereas the French command only has one, it would be well to plan
your campaign with this dangerous handicap in mind.



STRATEGY
========
The key objective of the French forces is to capture Brussels, since the
seizure of this city would intimidate Prussian and Russian troops into
negotiating with Napoleon. A treaty under these circumstances would mean
immediate withdrawal of Prussia and Russia from the war, leaving the scattered
British army of Wellington, the Anglo-Hanoverian divisions under Count Alten,
and those of the Netherlands under Prince William of Orang to bear the brunt
of a fresh French onslaught. Napoleon's cavalry and foot soldiers are seasoned
warriors, veterans of tens years of campaigning in various parts of Europe.
Without the support of Prussian and Russian reinforcements, the efforts of
allied troops to crush the re-expanding French empire will be futile.

The allied counter offensive must be a flanking attack on Paris and
simultaneously, the capture of the seaport of Calais. This French port seems
to be the logical place from which to undertake an invasion of Great Britain.
It is a strategic necessity for Wellington to seize and hold this city.
Naturally, the allied occupation of Paris would cause a demoralization of
French confidence. One actual weak point in the French military structure was
that the officers, despite their excellent training and morale, were totally
dependent upon the genius of Napoleon, to the extent that they were unable to
make their own decisions or initiate even the most crucial counterattack.

Many Belgian were sympathetic with the French cause, even though Napoleon had
been publicly branded an outlaw. They realized that the tyranny of Louis XVIII
was not an appetizing alternative. From historical accounts, it is clear that
Blucher and Wellington were more interested in a glorious military victory
executed in tactical excellence than in the countries whose soil they declared
they would defend or in the lives of the men who fought to win them that
victory. The generals of history have most often preferred to watch their
strategy unfold from the heights of a conveniently distant hill, while
underfed troops in mud-stained uniforms stumbled forward like sheep toward the
carnage.

If both you would-be-generals will take time to recognize and give emphasis to
these human and material factors, which were so overlooked by the
commanders-in-chief of the past, then, whatever the outcome of Waterloo you
can be sure it will be both different in details and vastly more interesting
than the actual course of European history.



WINNING
=======
One of the most important features which we have attempted to improve is a
definite win for either the Allied or French forces. If at anytime during the
battle Napoleon himself is killed, the Allied command is automatically
victorious. On the other hand if any of the Allied generals are killed, their
troops will desert to return to their homelands and their pieces will vanish
from the board. Aside from this quick way to win or lose, there are several
basic military objectives whihc have been described under Strategy, but which
we will reiterate because of their crucial importance in the game.

Seizure of Brussels by the French will result in the hasty retreat of the
Prussians and Russians. The fall of Paris will allow for the advancement of
Prussian and Russian troops into the battle zone. But if the French are able
to enter Calais with 6 units of sufficient strength, the invasion of Great
Britain can be seen to be a foregone conclusion and the game is lost by the
allies. Neither Napoleon nor his French forces will be considered defeated
until every unit in his army or Napoleon himself has been destroyed. Good luck
to you in your Waterloo campaign and we hope to see you at our wargame
convention in the summer of '82.

=============================================================================

                             Apple Screen Display
                             --------------------

Typist's Notes: The docs above list 16 sectors. Upon playing with the game, I
find four sectors on the screen at one time (with no discernable division
between sectors on screen). Near as I can figure (at this time), your units
will only flash in the sector you requested although three other sectors may
be showing on screen. I also note you can't jump to a sector if it's already
on screen. (i.e you orignally asked for sector 14, which brought up sectors 9,
13, 10 & 14. If you ask for sector 9 at this time, the game will not do
anything. You'd have to force the game to give you a different screenful of 4
sectors elsewhere then come back to sector 9).

                   Sector 1 Sector 5 | Sector  9 Sector 13
                   Sector 2 Sector 6 | Sector 10 Sector 14
                   ------------------|--------------------
                   Sector 3 Sector 7 | Sector 11 Sector 15
                   Sector 4 Sector 8 | Sector 12 Sector 16



                              Unit & Map Symbols
                              ------------------

Two horizontal lines - French coding      Two vertical lines - English coding
    Corners only box - Prussian coding  Sides & top only box - Russian coding
               Big X - Infantry           Chess style knight - Cavalry
              Cannon - Artillery (Foot)     Cannon on wheels - Artillery(Horse)
  Pentagon on stilts - Baggage Train               Minuteman - Messenger
                Star - General          Angled partial arrow - Lancers
      Box on a stick - Flag                            Big I - Imperial guard

           Circled C - Calais                      Circled B - Brussels
           Circled F - Frankfurt                   Circled P - Paris
           Circled T - Towns
