EAG Utilities Disk Program Descriptions

NOTE: most of these programs only work with Eamon version 4-6, as noted.

FREESPACE/FILEDUMP (all) A nifty little program with two user-specified
options: FREESPACE modifies DOS 3.3 so that the CATALOG command lists
free space at the top. FILEDUMP prints any text file directly to the
screen. Compatibility notes: FREESPACE prints a blank for free sectors
on my enhanced lIe but works OK on my 11+ and ROM1 GS. FILEDUMP works
fine on my 11+ and lIe but crashes into the Monitor on the CS.

CHANGE EAMON NAME (v6) A painless way to change an Adventure name or the
Adventure number. Caution: make sure that the EAMON ADVENTURE #XXX
program, the intro program, and EAMON.NAME are unlocked before running.

LAST UPDATE INSTALL (all) Back before the EAG took over Eamon library
maintenance, Eamon adventures had a blank line in the catalog where the
LAST UPDATE line is now. This program renames this "blank name" file to
LAST UPDATE. This program will crash on Eamons that have the LAST UPDATE
file.

EAMON DOS REMOVER (all) This program frees up an additional 32 sectors
of disk space by deleting DOS from the disk. It also adds an alert
message that prints to the screen when the disk is booted.

LCASE KILLER (all) BRUNnIng this program from a running Applesoft
program will convert all of the text in the program’s PRINT statements
to upper case.

LC/UC CONV (all) This program will convert any string to all upper case
text, as noted in the DDD 7.0 Utilities Manual. To make it available,
simply BLOAD it. To convert the string A$, use this command: CALL 768A$

VERSION ANALYSIS (vl-6) Can identify Eamon versions 1 through 6. Doesn’t
recognize non-standard formats or 7.x. See UNIVERSAL CHECK FILES.

ROOMS CONVERT (v4-5) This program can change the record size of the
EAMON.ROOMS data file. It reads in EAMON.ROOMS and writes a new file
names NEW. ROOMS at the specified record length. You must then delete
the original EAMON.ROOMS and rename NEW.ROOMS to EAMON.ROOMS to complete
the change. The new record length is specified in Line 20 of the
program, which you must modify to the length that you desire.

ROOM NAMES CONVERT (v4-6)

ARTIFACTS CONVERT (v4-5) These two programs work just like ROOMS CONVERT
above to convert EAMON.ROOM NAMES and EAMON.ARTIFACTS, respectively.

ARTIFACT MAINTENANCE (v4-6) Normally, using dead bodies greatly
complicates modification of the Artifact database, as the dead bodies
must all be together and should be at the end of the file. This program
gives you a quick and easy way to insert extra "DUMMY" artifacts into
any point in the artifact list. It will also remove excess artifacts
that you want to get rid of to free up disk and memory space.

REMOVE DUMMY ARTIFACTS (v4-6) A common way to develop Eamon adventures
is to stick a bunch of extra "DUMMY" artifacts in between the "real"
artifacts and the dead bodies. Thus you can use the "dummies" to add
more artifacts without having to monkey with the dead bodies. This
program can be used to help you get rid of excess dummies once you are
through with development.

DESC EDIT (v4-6) A very handy program for doing quick fixes of errors in
the descriptions.

UNIVERSAL CHECK FILES (v4-7) Reports the version and structure of Eamon
adventures. Recognizes all known non-standard formats. Verifies the
integrity of the database files and reports any errors.

ADD LIGHT TO ROOMS (v4-6) Adds the "light" data to the room data (if
it’s not already there) and sets all rooms to "lit".

DUNGEONAID (v4-6) Lists the number and names and selected data fields
for rooms, artifacts, or monsters. Can list to printer.

LIST EAMON R.A.M. (v4-6) Prints out the numbers and names of rooms,
artifacts, and monsters. Can list to printer.

ROOM ANALYSIS (v4-6) Lists room numbers and names plus all artifacts and
monsters in each room. Doesn’t recognize hidden or embedded artifacts.
Can list to printer.

QUICKY ROOM PRINT (v4-6) Lists room numbers and names plus room exits.
Does not print light. Can list to printer.

FLEX DUNGEON LIST 2.1 (v4-6) Prints out database in 40-col. format. Does
not print light.

DUNGEON LIST Z (v4-6) This program incorporates the features of several
old Eamon utilities not found on this disk. The features: Lists Rooms,
Artifacts, Effects, and Monsters; makes cleaner printouts than DUNGEON
LIST does. Room Analysis: same as described above. Walk-Through: enables
you to go from room to room; does not recognize doors or non-standard
room connections. The strength of this program is that it only loads
what it needs to do the task you select, and retains that data in
memory. Thus you can save a lot of time waiting on disk accesses, making
it very useful for messing about in the database.

DUNGEON LIST 6.OG (v4-6) Basically the same as the DUNGEON LIST program
on the 6.2 DDD, but with a couple of minor extras. Makes much cleaner
printouts than DUNGEON LIST does!

TEST BENCH (all) Allows you to quickly start an adventure without using
the Main Hall. You can define your test character’s (named "Testor of
Bench") basic stats, and will play with a basic set of weaponry. Note:
don’t use the "default" setting, which gives you a nearly helpless
character.

ADVANCED BENCH (all) Similar to TEST BENCH, but permits you to specify
more of the character’s stats. Gives you two mundane weapons and one 2D8
sword.

EAMON CHARACTERS FILE MAINT (all) A comprehensive CHARACTERS file
maintenance program that enables you to change any aspect of the
CHARACTERS database. You can also resurrect dead ones, make copies,
generate new characters, list the contents, and more.

CHAR REBIRTH (all) A simple program that will resurrect a "dead"
character in the CHARACTERS file. Handy when you’ve been killed out of
an adventure.

START ADVENTURE (all) This program is similar to the test benches above,
but gets the data from that stored in the CHARACTERS file. Handy for
quick startups because it is faster than using the Main Hall and doesn’t
mark the character as "dead".

FRESH SAM (all) Another program that starts Eamon adventures without
having to use the Main Hall. This one uses a preset character ("Sam"),
whose stats represent an advanced character who has earned reasonably
high stats and decent weapons. I personally use this program for all of
my Eamon playing.


see http://www.eamonag.org/manuals/utility-descriptions.htm