Using Downloaded .dsk Software

The software files made available here are what are known as "disk
image" files.  .DSK files are akin to backup files - that is, the entire
disk is read and then saved as a single "image" file.   In order to use
the .DSK file on your Apple II, you need to reconstitute the disk by
using a program such as DiskMaker8 (available
http://apple2online.com/web_documents/diskmaker_8_v1.1.zip) to read the
.DSK disk image file and write it back to a floppy disk.  The resulting
floppy disk is then useable by your Apple II.

As a means for transferring the .DSK image file, it is encased into a
ZIP file for storage on A2OL and transfer to your PC.

The steps you need to take to use the software are: - Download the ZIP
file containing the Apple II disk image to your PC - UnZIP the download
to get to the .DSK image file - Connect your II to your PC using a
serial cable - Use ADTPro (available
http://apple2online.com/web_documents/adtpro-1.1.6.zip) to transfer the
.DSK file to your Apple II - Use DiskMaker8 (available
http://apple2online.com/web_documents/diskmaker_8_v1.1.zip) to read the
.DSK file and write it to a floppy disk - The resulting floppy disk is
then bootable/useable by your Apple II

There is an link to an excellent video on using ADTPro here
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gw1hfZ-Bc4g&NR=1, made by the author of
ADTPro that I suggest you take a look at.  This video shows you how to
connect your Apple II to a PC using a serial cable and how to bootstrap
the Apple II using ADTPro. If you need a serial cable, you might be able
to pick one up online. 
