INSTRUCTIONS TO PHANTASIE I & II
================================


PHANTASIE I : THOLIE'S TALE
===========================

     Newly arrived on the island of Gelnor, an adventurer entered 
the remote town of Pelnor. From the deteriorating condition of the 
once-prosperous shops, it was clear that things were amiss - just 
the place where a courageous person might seek a worthy quest.
     The adventurer hailed a passing citizen. "Where might I find 
information about your town and land ?"
     Looking furtively over his shoulder, the man tersely replied, 
"Ask for Tholie at the inn," before scurrying away.
     Sure enough, the adventurer found the town's storyteller 
sitting at the back of the smoky, dimly lit common room.
     "Hail," greeted the adventurer, as he took a seat on the 
rough-hewn bench, "I've come to Gelnor to seek my fortune. Can you 
tell me the tales of this land ?"
     "Why certainly," said the old gnome. He waited for the 
adventurer to buy him a tankard of brew and a meat pie before 
commencing his tale in a soft sing-song voice.
     "In the beginning, there was a barren vastness, filled only 
with stars and light, and it was called the Astral Plane.
     "Within this vastness, a place was created wherin dwelt Zeus 
and his followers. The magical river Styx flowed 'round it all, 
and it was called the Olympic Plane.
     "Next, the earth and all things on it, living and dead, were 
created, and it was called the Material Pla-"
     "I already know the legends of how the world began!" 
interrupted the adventurer. A look of disgust and disbelief made 
its way across the youthful face. "I want to know about Gelnor and 
what's happening now. Are there adventures, fortunes, for the 
likes of me ?"
     "Ha!" Tholie briskly retorted. "Ever heard of the evil ones, 
called Black Knights? There are adventures a-plenty with them, 
forsooth!"
     The adventurers face lit up, and he leaned toward the 
storyteller. "Yes! Tell me about the Black Knights!"
     Tholie continued, "The Isle of Gelnor is divided by a chain 
of mountains into two regions. The west is the traditional domain 
of human and humanoid beings - with a few renegade orcs and lizard 
men - dedicated to order and goodness; the east is inhabited by 
more exotic creatures - dragons, trolls, and giants. These regions 
have been waging war throughout the history of this great land. 
Pelnor, the town we are now in, lies in the northwest corner..."
     "Black Knights! What about the Black Knights?" demanded the 
adventurer, interrupting once again.
     "Patience!" roared Tholie. His fist banged the table. "I'm 
getting there!
     "Since the Great Invasion by the evil sorceror Nikademus, the 
Isle of Gelnor has been terrorized by his merciless Black Knights. 
(The citizens of this land hold such fear and emnity for these 
intruders that it has even overshadowed their hatred for each 
other).
     "To maintain their reign of terror, the Black Knights travel 
form town to town, demanding sacrifices and homage. 'Though they 
travel in small bands, no Gelnorian can yet claim to have defeated 
one.
     "Any unfortunates who are espied by these evil ones must 
surrender all their money or die. Worst still, the Black Knights 
may bring the wrath of the gods upon those who oppose them. Few 
are willing to take the risk."
     "Defeating the Black Knights and destroying Nikademus is just 
the quest I need to win my fame and fortune," exclaimed the 
adventurer. "Where can I find them?"
     "No one knows where Nikademus can be found, but you can start 
with the Black Knights. You're bound to run into them if you 
travel in Gelnor."
     Jumping up, the adventurer turned to leave. "I shall gather a 
band of fellow seekers at the adventurer's Guild forthwith."
     "A few words of advice," Tholie called out. "Whatever your 
success, it is rumoured that new Black Knights are spawned in a 
fortress somewhere in Gelnor. Godspeed, and may your sword be 
swift and the gods be with you."




PHANTASIE II - NIKADEMUS' REVENGE
=================================
     Ferronrah, an island of great beauty and magic, lies just 
south of the Isle of Gelnor. Once a metropolis with a thriving 
trade industry and major naval power, it now appears to be under 
some grave calamity. A mysterious cloud hangs over the island - 
and no one has left or entered the island since the cloud first 
appeared, 40 years ago.
     In a small fishing boat just off the coast of Gelnor, an 
adventurer studies the dark cloud over ferronrah. His companion, 
an old man, skilfully hauls in his net of fish. "On my mothers 
grave, that is the work of Nikademus," he mutters.
     "What? Nikademus?" the adventurer asks.
     "Aye, an evil sorceror - the one that nearly destroyed my 
beloved Gelnor. 'Tis a wicked, beastly time on Ferronrah, you can 
be sure o' that. No one leaves the island, but rumours drift here. 
Ferronrah once had the prettiest fleet of boats I ever saw - sleek 
and fast - all gone now. The monsters destroyed them, the bloody, 
g-"
     "Never mind the boats, man!" the adventurer exclaims. "What 
about the people? Where are they?"
     "No one knows for sure, but it seems Nikademus has acquired 
new slaves. There was a message - now this has been passed through 
many lips - that the slaves are being forced to produce weapons. 
They say Nikademus is planning to invade other lands."
     The adventurer leans forward. "How can you be so sure it's 
the work of Nikademus?"
     "I know a sorceror when I see one!" cries the old man. "One 
night a few years back, I was fishing off the coast of Ferronrah 
near Pippicott. A great sou'wester caught me and pulled me toward 
Pippicott and nearly capsized my bonnie ship. After the storm 
quieted, I started to sail home, but suddenly my legs buckled 
and my eyes misted over. I could na' eat o' drink. And over my 
boat lay the cloud, the one you see at Ferronrah now." The 
adventure studies the cloud again and feels the hair raise on the 
back of his neck.
     "I drifted for nearly a week, sure I would die. Then one 
morning, I drifted clear of the cloud. I think I lived because of 
my time with the Pippicott Monk brotherhood. They taught me a 
spell or two, and I could handle a staff with the best of them. 
But some of the old strength must have been with me - that and the 
fact that Nikademus had other work to do," he said darkly.
     The old man's rheumy eyes look hard at the adventurer. "I'm 
too old to match swords with Nikademus. He'll only be conquered by 
a person of great bravery, strength, and valour - not by some 
young milksop like you."
     The adventurer leaps to his feet, nearly flipping the boat on 
his indignation. "A milksop! Why, I'm the finest adventurer alive! 
My sword is like lightning and my spells would wither even 
Nikademus! I ought to cut your throat for that insult, old man. 
Instead, I'll prove to you my cunning and skill. I shall free 
Ferronrah from Nikademus's evil power."
     "The way to Ferronrah is fraught with peril," warns the old 
man, his eyes reflecting some inner amusement. "Are you sure?"
     "I am ready."
     Quietly, the old man turns the boat, its bow pointing to 
Ferronrah. He begins to row. The black cloud looms ever nearer.



PHANTASIE I & II GENERAL RULES
==============================
The following information pertains to both Phantasie I & II,with a 
few small exceptions which will be noted in the relevant sections.     

Adventurers' Characteristics
============================

Adventurers, who can be created in the Guilds of each town, come
in a variety of races and classes (professions). In addition, each 
adventurer has a set of attributes. Race, class and attributes 
combine to make each character a unique individual.

Races

Race refers to a character's biological species. In the worlds of 
PHANTASIE (I & II), adventurers can be selected from the following 
races :-

HUMANS stand between 5.5 to 6 feet tall and tend to be equally 
good at most professions.
DWARVES are shorter and stouter than humans. They have great 
strength and constitution (their brawn makes up for their lack of 
brain).
ELVES are an attractive race, with lithe, slightly smaller-than-
human bodies. They have higher-than-average dexterity and
intelligence, but less strength.
GNOMES are like dwarves, only shorter. While not quite as strong, 
they do demonstrate greater dexterity.
HALFLINGS are small, like dwarves, but not as stout; they have 
greater mental power and less physical power.
RANDOM CREATURES are generally disliked by humans, so they must 
pay hefty training fees. They can only be thieves or fighters. 
When you select 'Random Creature', your character will be chosen 
form one of the following :
 - Gnolls are very strong, tall, dog-faced humanoids covered with 
fuzzy yellow-brown hair.
 - Goblins, very dexterous and ugly creatures, stand about 4 feet 
tall. They have large fangs, pointed ears, and foul breath.
 - Kobolds are small, old, dwarvish types, about 2 feet tall with 
gnarled faces. They have low strength but high dexterity and 
constitution.
 - Lizard Men stand about 7 feet tall. Though humanoid, they are 
reptilian in appearance with scales along their bodies, a heavy 
tail (useful in fighting), claws and a forked tongue. They are as 
strong as gnomes but not as bright, and they have good swimming 
skills.
 - Minotaurs look like humans with a bull's head and tail. They 
have great strength.
 - Ogres are large (8 feet), ugly humanoids, with squashed noses 
and protruding jaws. They are one of the strongest, but dimmest 
witted, of the races.
 - Orcs are uglygoblin-types, and they are strong, with good 
constitutions.
 - Pixies are tiny creatures (2 feet tall), with pointed ears and 
transparent wings. Their dexterity and intelligence run high.
 - Sprites are charming, sociable, fairy-like creatures. Because 
of their great dexterity and lack of strength, they make better 
thieves than fighters.
 - Trolls - with their thick, green, leathery skin - are renowned 
for their height (7 feet), strength, clumsiness, and stupidity.

Classes (Professions)

Class refers to an adventurer's profession or occupation. You can 
choose from among six classes :

FIGHTERS perform best in combat. Humans, dwarves, and random 
creatures make good fighters.

MONKS are average in combat, but they know combat spells and have 
some thieving skills. Humans, elves, and hobbits do well.

PRIESTS are fair in combat, but they have many defensive and 
healing speels. The better priests are human.

RANGERS are very good in combat, and they know some priestly 
spells. Humans and dwarves make good rangers.

THIEVES are good with traps, locks, and hidden items; but they 
perform poorly in combat. Their fighting skills are helped by the 
fact that they can hit a monster no matter where it is, due to 
their stealth. Hobbits, gnomes, and some of the random creatures 
make excellent thieves.

WIZARDS are chiefly spellcasters. While poor in hand-to-hand 
combat, they know many offensive spells and are extremely 
important in encounters with monsters. Humans and elves do the job 
best.


Individual Attributes

Five attributes are generated by the program after a new 
adventurer's race and class have been chosen. The value of each 
attribute ranges from 3 to 22, and the average depends on the 
character's race and class. Each attribute determines a different 
capability :

STRENGTH (STR) refers to physical strength, and it is crucial for 
hand-to-hand combat. Fighters need a lot of strength to wield 
high-level combat equipment.

INTELLIGENCE (INT) is the mental prowess necessary for learning 
and casting spells. Wizards, priests, and monks must have a high 
intelligence.

DEXTERITY (DEX) means physical agility in handling weapons and 
conjuring spells, and especially in dodging attacks from monsters.
Each profession needs good dexterity, especially fighters and 
spell casters.

CONSTITUTION (CON) refers to a character's endurance and it 
affects the number of hit points a character can have (see 
Mortality and Hit Points in the ENCOUNTERS section).

CHARISMA (CHA) means having a charming personality and good looks. 
A character's charisma affects the price of training and spells 
(one further reason that many low-charisma random creatures must 
pay more).


Interaction of Characteristics 

A character's race and class affect the individual attributes. The 
following charts show, to some degree, how these characteristics 
interact with each other.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Attribute Modifiers by Class (i.e initial values before computer 
modifies them)

               STR       INT       DEX       CON       CHA

Fighter        12         8        11        10         9
Monk           10        10        11        10        10
Priest         10        12        10        10        10
Ranger         10        11        10        10        11
Thief           8        10        12        10         9
Wizard          6        13         8        10        11

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Maximum value for attributes by Race

               STR       INT       DEX       CON       CHA

Human          18        18        18        18        18
Dwarf          20        17        17        19        17
Elf            17        19        19        17        18
Gnome          19        17        18        19        17
Halfling       16        18        20        18        17
Gnoll          20        13        17        21        11
Goblin         17        14        18        17        11
Kobold         17        15        19        19        13
Lizard Man     19        14        17        18        13
Minotaur       20        14        16        19        12
Ogre           21        14        16        19        13
Orc            19        16        17        18        14
Pixie          16        18        21        16        17
Sprite         16        18        22        16        17
Troll          22        13        15        20        12

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Note : In the above section on attributes, etc., references are 
made to a race called hobbit.These instructions have been typed 
exactly as they were written, but it doesn't appear as though 
there is a 'hobbit' race. Instead, I think that these references 
should have been to the 'halfling' race which does exist, so bear 
that in mind whilst reading these instructions (Sewer Rat!)

-----------------------------------------------------------------

TOWNS : Starting (and Ending)
=============================

After choosing 'START IN PELNOR' on the initial menu, you will be 
in Pelnor, one of the 11 towns of Gelnor. It is in these towns 
that you will gather a band of noble, stout-hearted adventurers to 
take exploring; buy equipment. training and spells; rest and 
refresh yourself; take care of money matters - all those concerns 
of daily life. Every town in Gelnor offers safety from monsters 
and provides the same amenities.
     Each Gelnorian town operates in exactly the same manner, and 
they are identified by their name and number. Pelnor is town #1.

The town menu shows two types of commands : places to go and 
things to do.

TOWN MENU : GO TO

     The top menu gives the commands that will take you to the
various locations within the town walls : Armory, Guild, Mystic,
Inn, Bank, and Road out of town.
     The first place a new game player should visit is the Guild, 
where you can gather together a band of adventurers (see 
ADVENTURERS' CHARACTERISTICS section).
     GUILD is where the characters are generated and then formed 
into parties. As many as 37 characters can be generated, but a 
party can have no more than 6 adventurers.
     GUILD MEMBERS commands are used to create new adventurers and 
add them to a party. Members may also be deleted from a party or 
renamed.

OPTIONS

- List all guild members in Gelnor
- Purge a Guild member
- Create a new guild member
- Rename a guild member
- Add a guild member to a party

     NEW MEMBERS are created one at a time, and they should be 
carefully chosen. You must find the optimal mix of classes and 
races (see ADVENTURERS' CHARACTERISTICS section).
     First, select the race of the new member, then choose the 
class.

PLAYING HINT : The following roster is recommended for a first-
time party :
     2 Spellcasters (wizards, monks) - humans or elves
     1 Healer (priest, ranger) - human or dwarf
     1 Thiefy type (thief, monk) - gnome, halfling, or random 
                      creature
     2 Combatants (fighters, rangers) - humans, dwarves, or random
                      creature

     Once you have selected the race and class for the character, 
the program will assign number values to the individual 
attributes. If you find the attributes acceptable, you will type 
in the character's name.
     Next, the full list of statistics for the new character will 
be shown (see Inspect, under TOWN MENU : OTHER OPTIONS, for a full 
explanation). When you have finished studying the display, you may 
go back to the Guild Menu.

PLAYING HINT : Once generated, adventurers cannot get training in 
combat or spellcasting, nor can they leave the Guild for other 
parts of town, until AFTER they have joined a party.            

LIST MEMBERS shows all the Guild members of Gelnor, including each 
character's Guild number, name, class, and current residence 
(Pelnor is town #1). The last three characters - FIRE, WATER and 
EARTH - are the elementals that spellcasters may call into combat, 
using the SUMMON ELEMENTAL spell. Notice that they are fighters, 
that they also have Guild numbers, and that they live in town #0 
(not found in the Material Plane).
     When you have finished with the list, return to the Guild 
Menu.

ADD MEMBERS to a party by giving the Guild number (not name - see 
LIST MEMBERS) of the character you want to add to the party.A 
party can have up to 6 adventurers. When characters join a party, 
a new PARTY number is assigned to each one. As long as the 
character is in a party, the party number will be used to answer 
prompts by the program.

PLAYING HINT : If you plan to use the SUMMON ELEMENTAL spell 
during your next adventure, you should add the elementals to the 
party while you're still at the Guild.

RENAME MEMBERS lets you give a Guild member a new name. Characters 
cannot be renamed while they are members of a party.

PARTY MEMBERS options can only be used by characters that have 
been added to a party. Members may learn new spells, train for the 
next level, or be dropped off at the Guild.

SPELLS tells you which new spells can be learned by the character 
and how much they will cost. The spell will be identified by its 
number, not its name (see MAGIC section). If there are no numbers 
after POSSIBLE SPELLS, then no new spells can be learned at this 
time.

TRAINING is the most effective way for a character to go up a 
level. When you enter the training arena, you will be told how 
many experience points are required and how much the training will 
cost.

PLAYING HINT : Characters must be carrying gold pieces (GP) to pay 
for learning new spells and training. With new party members, this 
means going to the Bank (see BANK), making a withdrawal, then 
returning to the Guild.

DROP FROM PARTY allows you to eliminate a character from the party 
and send him or her back to the Guild.

EXIT GUILD takes you back to the town menu.

BANK has an account for each adventurer, and there are bank 
branches in every Gelnorian town. Money transactions can be made 
in any of these locations.
     All the gold assigned to characters when they were generated 
was automatically deposited in their accounts. Before buying 
equipment and items at the Armory or buying spellcasting lessons 
and training at the Guild, gold needs to be withdrawn from the 
bank. Characters should take enough to cover wilderness expenses, 
too - stays at inns, bribes, or purchases in the dungeons. Each of 
these costs about 250 GPs.
     When entering a bank, the amount of gold pieces the party is 
carrying will be displayed (which will be 0, if a party has just 
been formed).The following options will be given :
 - Withdraw money
 - Deposit money
 - Exit

WITHDRAW GOLD PIECES allows each party member to withdraw gold 
from his or her account. Once withdrawn, the gold is pooled and 
carried by the party. Only the party's total number of GPs will be 
shown after withdrawals. A party can carry up to 65,000 GPs. 

DEPOSIT CARRIED GOLD allows you to split the party's gold among 
the individual members, then deposit each share into the 
appropriate person's account. First you will be asked how many 
shares each party member gets (1,2, or 3).Then the number of GPs 
deposited into each account is displayed. A bank account for a 
single character can hold a maximum of 65,000 GPs (unlimited on 
the ST, as is the amount a party can carry - Sewer Rat!)

EXIT BANK takes you back to the Town Menu.

ARMORY stocks weapons, armor, shields, scrolls, magic potions, and 
healing potions - depending upon what is in the inventory at any 
given time.
     The Armorer buys his inventory from adventurers who enter 
town and sell the treasures they found during their journeys. The 
items are placed in the store and resold at a slightly higher 
price. Armories should be checked for changes in their stock.

PLAYING HINT : Rings, scrolls, and other treasures found in the 
Armory stay there for future visits. Combat weapons and potions, 
however, may appear and disappear between visits.

     When you enter the Armory, you will be asked who is shopping. 
Select the appropriate character, then list the inventory. You 
will see a display listing the commands and the items available 
for purchase.
     The number in the first column is the item number, to be used 
when you BUY ITEM; the third column shows the price; and the 
fourth column shows the point value of combat equipment (see 
TREASURES section for an explanation of what the items can do).

The following actions may be taken in the Armory :
 
 - List the items currently in stock
 - Continue the listing or repeat the list again
 - Let the current shopping character buy an item
 - Allow another party member to shop
 - Take the party back to the Town Menu

     If you get the message, YOU CAN'T PURCHASE THAT, it means 
that you don't have enough money or that item has sold out, even 
though it's still listed (did someone just buy it?).

PLAYING HINT : A character can only use one weapon, armor, and 
shield at a time, and they are never lost or stolen. If the 
character buys or finds new equipment, it should have a higher 
point value than the one already owned. Whatever the equipment is, 
make sure that the character has enough strength (STR) to use it - 
even the club (point value is 4) may be too strong for a weaker 
character (see Combat Equipment in the TREASURES section). If the 
equipment is too strong for the current shopper, the item will be 
marked UNUSABLE.

MYSTIC gives an overall score for the party, so you can determine 
its progress in the adventure.

INN is where characters can have their hit points and magic 
restored to their maximum limit. Inns located in towns are free, 
and each stay lasts about two weeks. In addition, independent inns 
are located throughout the Isle of Gelnor, and they cost 250 GPs 
(plus tax) per stay.

PLAYING HINT : Characters who have cast peels during their 
adventures may find their maximum limit fir magic has been raised 
after resting at an inn.

LEAVE TOWN puts you on the road outside town (see ADVENTURES 
section).


TOWN MENU : OTHER OPTIONS

     Besides visiting the various merchants in a town, characters 
can perform certain activities shown on the lower portion of the 
Town Menu :
 - Cast a spell
 - Use an item that a character is carrying
 - Distribute and sell items (after an adventure)
 - Inspect the statistics of a party member
 - Save game

INSPECT PARTY MEMBERS gives the statistics for a character in the 
party. You will be asked for the character you wish to inspect, 
and then you will see the display shown at the bottom of the 
previous column.
     The display includes the character's name, level, class, 
race, and health status.

INDIVIDUAL ATTRIBUTES are listed in the first column, along with 
LUCK (a randomly assigned value from 8 to 13). These figures 
determine how certain tasks are performed (see ADVENTURERS' 
CHARACTERISTICS section for a full explanation).

AGE starts affecting the characters attributes as they reach their 
'declining years'. Each race has a different lifespan : elves live 
about 3000 years; dwarves and gnomes about 200 years; humans, about 
80 years; and the others, about 40 to 50 years.

HIT POINTS indicate the amount of damage a character can sustain 
before dying. The number after the "/" shows the total number of 
hit points the character has; the number before the "/" shows the 
current status (it will go down whenever the character gets 
damaged and will go back up when rested or healed). When the 
character's hit points reach o, he or she is dead (see Mortality 
nd Hit Points in the ENCOUNTERS section).

MAGIC shows the number of points that can be used for spellcasting
and different spells use up differing amounts of magic points (see 
MAGIC section). The number after the "/" shows the total allowed 
the character; the number before the "/" shows the number left (it 
will go down each time the character casts a spell and go back up 
when rested or after taking a MAGIC potion).

GOLD IN BANK is the amount of gold the character has, which has 
been deposited in the bank. It does not include any of the 
character's gold that is currently being carried by the party. All 
characters start with 256 gold pieces (GP).

EXPERIENCE POINTS refers to the amount of experience the character 
has. Experience points are earned by killing monsters, and they 
determine the character's level, which in turn determines maximum 
hit points, maximum magic points, number of spells that can be 
learned, etc.

SCORE shows the character's general playing strength.

SKILLS  include attack (striking foe in combat), parry (defending 
yourself in combat), swimming ability, listening for monsters, 
spotting traps in dungeons, disarming traps, finding treasure, and 
picking locks. The numbers show the percentage chance of being 
successful in these activities - ATTACK 48 means a 48% chance of 
being successful in hitting (attacking) a monster.

EQUIPMENT lists the weapon (club), armor (robes), and shield. The 
numbers after combat items show their point values - the higher 
the number the more effective the item. As other items are 
collected or bought at the armory, they will be listed here. 
Players can carry only 9 items at a time.

SPELLS gives the spell number of those spells the character has 
learned. Spell 1, for example, is Healing 1 (see MAGIC section).

     When you have finished studying the character's statistics,
hit the SPACE BAR to go back to the Town Menu.

CAST SPELL can only be done with those spells allowed in town, 
such as transportation and heal (see MAGIC section).

USE ITEM lets an adventurer use one of the items that he or she is 
carrying - read a scroll, take a magic or healing potion, and find 
the unusual properties of an item. After giving the character's 
number (not name), a list of his or her items will be shown. You 
then choose the one to be used.

PLAYING HINT : Scrolls can only be used (read) in a town.

DISTRIBUTE AND SELL ITEMS lets the members of the party gather up 
all their equipment - old items the party started out with and new 
items found or bought during their adventures - and distribute 
them to party members or sell them to the Armory.
     The items carried by the party will be listed, along with the 
characters who can use each one. Items are listed from best to 
worst - first magical, then non-magical.

PLAYING HINT : Make sure all party members are present before you 
distribute and sell items. Do this before you save a game.
     Remember that each party member can only carry up to 9 items 
at a time.

SAVE GAME is always accomplished in a town. Make sure you have the 
Guild number of the characters you are saving, because you will 
need to use them when you begin again (see ENCORE : Continuing 
Saved Games).



ADVENTURES
==========
     
     Your adventures are now beginning. You will travel across the 
fair Isle of Gelnor and perhaps explore a dungeon or two ... maybe 
more. Good luck in your quest.
     Messages will be displayed from time to time. The first one 
reads, A TOWN. ENTER? It requires a yes/no answer. For other 
messages that need a different respons, hit the appropriate 
option. For example, this message might be displayed :
     THIEF SPOTS A TRAP
      DISARM OR LEAVE?
     Choose DISARM or LEAVE (If you choose to disarm it, you will 
be asked who will do it. Respons with the appropriate character).
     If no response is required for a message, hit RETURN to erase 
it.

Wilderness Travel
=================

     When your party leaves town and enters the wilderness, a map 
of the area you are in will be displayed (see specific computer 
instructions at end), along with pictures of the party members and 
a list of command options. The area near your starting point is 
known to you and visible. When you travel to unknown lands, the 
map is blank. When you pass through, it becomes visible. Options 
available are as follows :

 - Cast a spell
 - Display health of each party member
 - Inspect the party and each member
 - Allow a party member to use a potion
 - Alter melee speed and toggle sound
 - Move north one square
 - Move south one square
 - Move east one square
 - Move west one square

CAST SPELL only works for non-combat/wilderness spells and 
everywhere spells (see MAGIC section).

HEALTH displays the hit points and magic points for each party 
member.

INSPECT displays the party's statistics, the statistics and items 
carried by each party member, and any newly acquired items.

USE POTION allows a character to use a magic or healing potion on 
himself or any other member of the party. When asked who is using 
the potion, select the appropriate character. Then a list of the 
character's potions will be displayed. Pick the potion, then 
select the character to receive it.

TIME LAG allows you to speed up or slow down melee action. Choose 
a number between 0 and 9 (0 is the fastest, 9 the slowest). You 
will also be asked if you want sound.

MAP of Gelnor is divided into 16 sections. If your party moves off 
the edge of the map, the next section will be displayed.

CROSSING WATER, either rivers or lakes, means the party members 
must swim or cross a bridge. Characters with poor swimming 
abilities may sustain damage (thereby reducing their hit points).

INNS are scattered over the Isle of Gelnor, in addition to being 
found in each town. These independent inns, though, cost 250 GP 
plus tax for a single stay of two weeks. Like the inns in town, 
they restore each characters magic and hit points to their maximum 
limits. Sometimes they increase spellcasters' maximum magic 
points.


Dungeon Exploration
===================

     When the party nears a dungeon, you will be asked if you want 
to enter, Answer Y or N. If you enter, you will be asked to turn 
your disk over, so the dungeon program can be loaded into the 
computer (not necessary on the ST). Once loaded, the program will 
ask you if you want to leave. Answer Y or N.
     When the party enters the dungeon, the wilderness map is 
replaced by the dungeon map, which is revealed as the party passes 
through each area.
     The command line has a new option : Look at a larger area.

LOOK lets you 'see' a larger area than you could otherwise. Some 
rooms, though, may be even larger than the area you can see with 
this command.

LISTEN skills are automatically employed by party members when 
they approach a door. If they hear monsters, a message is shown, 
and you have the option of turning back.

PICK LOCK, FIND ITEM, SPOT TRAP are also automatically attempted 
at the appropriate times. Success depends upon the party members' 
skill levels for these tasks.

DISARM TRAP is an option available when traps are spotted. If you 
want the trap disarmed, you will be asked who will do it. Select 
the appropriate character (usually a thief who has good disarm- 
trap skills).

LEAVING THE DUNGEON is done through the same door used when the 
party entered. On leaving, you will be asked if you want to save 
its current status.

PLAYING HINT : When you enter a dungeon for the second time, the 
monsters may be prepared for you - new locks installed and new 
monsters recruited. There is a limit, however, to what can be done 
with short notice; if you return soon after you left, the monsters 
you killed might still be dead.


ENCOUNTERS
==========

     Your party will inevitably encounter monsters, whether in the 
wilderness or a dungeon. While they may not be hostile, they will 
never be helpful. The risk is high - death to the unprepared and 
inexperienced.

Melee
=====

     When the party and the monsters come face to face, a message 
will flash on the screen : AN ENCOUNTER. Next, you will see a 
display.
     The top of the screen lists the party members, how many 
strikes each character can get into a single attack, each person's 
magic status, hit-point status, and general health.
     The middle section lists the monsters and how many are in 
each rank or row. Rank 1 is the row closest to the party members, 
and most attacks will only be on these monsters.
     The bottom section of the screen lists the options for the 
party as a whole :

 - Fight the monsters
 - Accept the monsters' surrender
 - Greet the monsters
 - Beg mercy from the monsters
 - Run away

FIGHT starts combat between party members and the monsters.

ACCEPT SURRENDER (if the monsters do surrender) allows you to take 
the monsters gold and items.

GREETINGS (if they are accepted by the monsters) allows the party 
to pass unharmed without combat.

BEG FOR MERCY lets the party surrender its gold and some newfound 
items, then go free.

FLEE (if successful) allows the party to avoid combat. If 
unsuccessful, the monsters get a 'free' attack on the party.

     Combat takes place in melee rounds. In a single round, each 
party member will have individual options :
 - Thrust with weapon
 - Attack with weapon
 - Slash with weapon
 - Lunge with weapon
 - Cast combat spell
 - Parry with shield
 - Redo options

ATTACK means taking two normal swings at a nearby monster (in Rank 
1).

THRUST means taking one hard, solid swing, which is more likely to 
hit and does 1 to 2 more points of damage than an attack.

SLASH means taking 3 or 4 quick swings, each of which is less 
likely to hit than an attack, and does 1 to 2 points less damage.

LUNGE allows fighters to take one swing at a monster in Rank 2.

CAST prompts you for the spell number you want.

PARRY is a defensive move, where the character uses a shield.

REDO lets you give a new command to a party member. You are given 
this option again, when all party members have been assigned a 
move.

PLAYING HINT : The best strategy is to thrust or lunge at monsters 
who are hard to hit, and attack or slash at those who are easily 
hit.

     Due to their stealth, thieves can attack, thrust or slash at 
monsters in any rank.
     You will see each melee round enacted on the left section of 
the screen, with each action recorded.
     At the end of melee, you will make your choices for the party 
members' next melee round. The action continues until the monsters 
are all dead, have run away, or surrendered - or until the party 
has begged for mercy,fled or been killed.

EXPERIENCE POINTS AND GOLD are displayed at the end of combat - 
the number of experience points earned from the encounter and any 
gold retrieved form the monsters. These will be divided among 
individual party members when they enter a town.

TREASURE might be found, if the monsters had any and if a party 
member has good find-item skills for locating them in dungeons. 
(Monsters defeated in the wilderness and who surrender in the 
dungeons automatically give away their treasure). You will be 
asked if you want to keep the treasure item (see TREASURES 
section). Items can be distributed and used when you enter a town. 
The party can carry up to 90 items they find while exploring 
(again, as far as I can remember, the ST version allows an 
unlimited number of items - Sewer Rat!).

NIGHT ENCOUNTERS periodically occur in the wilderness. At that 
time, whoever is on watch will hopefully hear the monsters and 
awaken the other party members. Otherwise, party members will wake 
up in the middle of combat. A priest or high-level ranger can 
speed up the process by casting an Awaken spell (see MAGIC 
section).


Mortality and Hit Points
========================

     Each time a monster hits a character or other damage is 
sustained, the hit points will go down. When they reach 0, the 
character is dead (although he or she might be brought back to 
life by a high-level wizard using a RESURRECT spell).
     Hit points can be restored by taking a HEALING POTION (see 
TREASURES section), a HEALING spell cast by a priest or ranger 
(see MAGIC section), or by resting in an inn. Depending on the 
amount of damage the adventurer has taken, a combination of 
methods might be necessary to restore full health.
     The maximum number of hit points allowed depends on the 
character's constitution, class, and experience level. The chart 
below shows averages for each profession by level.


-----------------------------------------------------------------

Hit Points by Class and Level for Adventurers with 10 Constitution

                              LEVEL
          1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15

Fighter  10 20 32 44 56 70 82 94 106 120 130 140 150 160 170
Ranger    8 18 28 40 50 60 72 84  96 110 120 130 140 150 160
Priest    8 12 20 30 40 50 60 70  80  90  98 106 114 122 130
Monk      8 10 18 22 32 44 54 62  70  80  88  96 104 112 120
Thief     6 10 18 22 32 40 48 54  60  70  78  86  94 102 110
Wizard    6  8 12 16 22 28 34 38  44  50  56  62  68  74  80

-----------------------------------------------------------------


MONSTERS

     The Isle of Gelnor has its share of monsters - 80 different
types, all willing and able to do battle with adventurers. Each
type of monster has its own unique personality and set of
attributes. These include how many are likely to appear at one
time, attack and defense skills, amount of damage that can be
inflicted on victims, experience points and levels, magic power,
hit points, size, 'niceness' and amount of gold and treasure
carried.
     Some of these monsters will not have good attack skills but 
will defend very well, come in large packs, and be able to inflict 
much damage with the few attacks they accomplish. Others will have 
great attack skills but poor defense skills, yet the damage done 
to the victim by each hit will be low. High-level monsters, of 
course, will have good attack and defense skills, lots of magic to 
throw at adventurers, and enough hit points to fend off 
adventurers for many melee rounds. 
     First time adventurers may take comfort; easily conquered 
monsters are around. Skeletons, giant ants, and giant bees, for 
example, have medium attack skills (45% to 50%), inflict damage on 
their victims of 1 to 7 points, and only have a few hit points. 
Attack these monsters with alacrity.
     On the other hand, low-level adventurers might want to avoid 
the vipers. These 10-foot snakes are quite agile, making their 
attacks successful 80% of the time. Their thick skins give them 20 
hit points, and their treacherous fangs can inflict from 1 to 14 
points of damage.
     Magic users appear harmless, since their scrawny bodies 
afford them a mere 7 hit points and their attack skills are only 
50%. Beware, however. Their magic is strong; and if they get off 
one or two combat spells, your party could be depleted of several 
members.
     As you explore more and more of Gelnor with stronger and 
stronger parties of adventurers, you will encounter monsters of 
increasing strength and power. Some have hit points in the 
hundreds, attack skills of 100% or more, and extremely high 
defense skills. Needless to state, one does not wrangle with Black 
Knights, gods, or other high-level beings carelessly. Be warned!



MAGIC
=====

     Magic is an integral part of the PHANTASIE experience, and it 
is especially useful in fighting monsters. The dexterous use of 
hand-to-hand combat and offensive combat spells may be the only
way to defeat the foe.
     When spells are conjured and cast, they use up the 
spellcaster's magic points. Spells can cost from 1 to 4 magic 
points for each use, depending upon the spell. Magic points can be 
restored by drinking MAGIC potions and resting at inns.

Spell Descriptions
==================

COMBAT SPELLS can only be used during encounters with monsters. 
They last only for the duration of combat. There are two types of 
combat spells :
- Passive magic always works and, whenever possible, counteracts 
any previously cast spells. For example, if an evil wizard throws 
a WEAKNESS 4 spell at the party, a STRENGTH 3 spell will cancel 
it. If na additional STRENGTH spell of any kind is cast, it will 
cancel the STRENGTH 3 spell.
- Active magic's effectiveness depends upon the spellcaster's 
magic power and experience level, as well as the strength of the 
target. Active spells may have a cumulative effect. A second FEAR 
speel, for example, can cause the victim to be even more afraid 
(but a second SLEEP spell will not deepen a trance).

NON-COMBAT SPELLS are used when no monsters are being encountered. 
There are three types :
- Town spells can only be cast in one of Gelnor's towns.
- Wilderness magic must be worked in the wilderness.
- Dungeon spells can be cast in dungeons.

EVERYWHERE SPELLS can be cast at any time and in any place - in 
combat or non-combat situations, and in town, dungeons, or in the 
wilderness.


------------------------------------------------------------------

The following spells are available in PHANTASIE I & II

Spell   Magic   Name                    Type
  #      Pts
 
  1       1     HEALING 1               E      
  2       2     HEALING 2               E
  3       3     HEALING 3               E
  4       4     HEALING 4               E

  5       1     FIREFLASH 1             C/A
  6       2     FIREFLASH 2             C/A
  7       3     FIREFLASH 3             C/A
  8       4     FIREFLASH 4             C/A

  9       1     QUICKNESS 1             C/P
 10       2     QUICKNESS 2             C/P
 11       3     QUICKNESS 3             C/P
 12       4     QUICKNESS 4             C/P

 13       1     STRENGTH 1              C/P
 14       2     STRENGTH 2              C/P
 15       3     STRENGTH 3              C/P
 16       4     STRENGTH 4              C/P

 17       1     PROTECTION 1            C/P
 18       2     PROTECTION 2            C/P
 19       3     PROTECTION 3            C/P
 20       4     PROTECTION 4            C/P

 21       1     CONFUSION 1             C/A
 22       2     CONFUSION 2             C/A
 23       3     CONFUSION 3             C/A
 24       4     CONFUSION 4             C/A

 25       1     WEAKNESS 1              C/A
 26       2     WEAKNESS 2              C/A
 27       3     WEAKNESS 3              C/A
 28       4     WEAKNESS 4              C/A

 29       1     BINDING 1               C/A
 30       2     BINDING 2               C/A
 31       3     BINDING 3               C/A
 32       4     BINDING 4               C/A

 33       1     MINDBLAST 1             C/A
 34       2     MINDBLAST 2             C/A
 35       3     MINDBLAST 3             C/A
 36       4     MINDBLAST 4             C/A

 37       1     FLAMEBOLT 1             C/A
 38       2     FLAMEBOLT 2             C/A
 39       3     FLAMEBOLT 3             C/A
 40       4     FLAMEBOLT 4             C/A

 41       1     CHARM                   C/A
 42       2     SLEEP                   C/A
 43       3     TELEPORTATION           C/A
 44       4     RESURRECTION            E

 45       1     NINJA 2                 C/P
 46       2     FEAR                    C/A
 47       3     DISSOLVE                C/A
 48       4     SUMMON ELEMENTAL        C/P

 49       1     DISPELL UNDEAD          C/A
 50       2     NINJA 1                 C/P
 51       3     AWAKEN                  C/A
 52       4     MONSTER EVALUATION      N/WD

 53       1     VISION                  N/W
 54       2     TRANSPORTATION          N/T

------------------------------------------------------------------

Spell types are as follows :
- E    = Everywhere
- C/P  = Combat/passive (not cumulative)
- C/A  = Combat/active (cumulative)
- N/WD = Non-combat, wilderness or dungeon only
- N/W  = Non-combat, wilderness only
- N/T  = Non-combat, town only

------------------------------------------------------------------


Description of Spells (in alphabetical order) :
===============================================

AWAKEN (#51) rouses all sleeping party members or neutralizes a 
Sleep spell.

BINDING (#29-#32) inhibits the movement of opponents, so those 
affected are easier to hit. These spells are progressive, so 
Binding 3 is more powerful than Binding 2 and Binding 1 combined.
They are particularly effective against flying creatures and 
monsters that are difficult to hit.

CHARM (#41) makes monsters so friendly, the forget they are in 
combat.

CONFUSION (#21-#24) makes it difficult for monsters to use their 
magic. The spells are progressive, so Confusion 3 is more powerful 
than Confusion 2 and Confusion 1 combined. Confusion 4 is so 
effective that its victims will be completely unable to do any 
spellcasting.

DISPELL UNDEAD (#49) affects skeletons, zombies, ghosts, and other 
creatures who have returned from the grave. They may flee or 
simply dissolve.

DISSOLVE (#47) causes monsters to slowly dissolve away into 
nothing.

FEAR (#46) frightens the monsters into running away in terror.

FIREFLASH (#5-#8) shoots a powerful blast of flame at one monster 
close to the spellcaster, causing the following damage :
          Fireflash 1 - 1-10  points of damage
          Fireflash 2 - 1-30  points of damage
          Fireflash 3 - 1-60  points of damage
          Fireflash 4 - 1-100 points of damage

FLAMEBOLT (#37-#40) delivers one bolt of magical flame at each 
monster and does damage to its hit points (although some of the 
effect is absorbed by its armor).
          Flamebolt 1 - 1-7  points damage
          Flamebolt 2 - 1-15 points damage
          Flamebolt 3 - 1-31 points damage
          Flamebolt 4 - 1-66 points damage

HEALING (#1-#4) restores hit points to one party member :
          Healing 1 - 1-9  hit points
          Healing 2 - 1-27 hit points
          Healing 3 - 1-57 hit points
          Healing 4 - 1-99 hit points

MINDBLAST (#33-#36) transmits a powerful blast of psychic energy 
to the monsters and causes damage to their hit points :
          Mindblast 1 - 1-5  points damage
          Mindblast 2 - 1-11 points damage
          Mindblast 3 - 1-41 points damage
          Mindblast 4 - 1-81 points damage

MONSTER EVALUATION (#52) determines the approximate experience 
level of nearby monsters. Although it occasionally yields 
inaccurate results, it is a good spell to cast immediately upon 
entering a dungeon and at regular intervals in the wilderness.

NINJA (#45 & #50) transforms the spellcaster into a fighter of 
superhuman ability. Although Ninja 1 costs more magic points, it 
is not as powerful as Ninja 2.

PROTECTION (#17-#20) increases the effectiveness of each party 
member's armor by putting a magic aura around it :
          Protection 1 - +1 point
          Protection 2 - +3 points
          Protection 3 - +6 points
          Protection 4 - +10 points

QUICKNESS (#9-#12) makes all party members move faster, so they 
can swing more times during an attack :
          Quickness 1 - 10% increase
          Quickness 2 - 25% increase
          Quickness 3 - 45% increase
          Quickness 4 - 70% increase

RESURRECTION (#44) attempts to raise one party member from death. 
The shock of dying, however, will permanently lower the 
constitution of the victim by one or two points.

SLEEP (#42) causes the opponents to fall into a daze, and they 
cannot attack, parry, or cast spells.

STRENGTH (#13-#16) makes the party members stronger, increasing 
the amount of damage opponents take when they get hit :
          Strength 1 - 1-2  extra points of damage
          Strength 2 - 1-4  extra points of damage
          Strength 3 - 1-7  extra points of damage
          Strength 4 - 1-11 extra points of damage
      
SUMMON ELEMENTAL (#48) calls up Earth, Fire or Water (one spell 
summons one elemental) to fight for the party. The elemental will 
only serve a party of six adventurers. What's more, elementals 
must be added to your party while you are at the adventurer's 
Guild on one of the towns.

TELEPORTATION (#43) teleports the party safely away from combat.

TRANSPORTATION (#54) inter-dimensionally transports the party from 
one town to another.

VISION (#53) gives the spellcaster the ability to see in all 
directions for hundreds of miles. It is particularly useful for 
mapping vast unknown areas.

WEAKNESS (#25-#28) causes monsters to lose strength so they do 
less damage when they hit party members. The strength of the spell 
depends on how powerful the monsters are and which spell was used 
(1,2,3, or 4).

DIVINE SPELLS (#58+) may only be acquired in the course of the 
game for special purposes.


Spells by Class and Level
=========================

 Each class of adventurer can learn spells, though for some 
classes, a high level of experience is required. The following 
chart shows which spells (designated by their number) are 
available to be learned at which level, arranged by class. 
Although spells may be available for learning, how many spells a 
character can actually learn depends on his or her intelligence, 
as well as class and level.
   
------------------------------------------------------------------
            Spells Available at Different Levels by Class
                              LEVEL
        01  02  03  04  05  06  07  08  09  10  11  12  13  14  15

Wizard  05  13  06  07  21  25  08  34  11  35  15  36  12  16  47
        09  41  10  14  54  33  37  45  38  --  39  48  --  40  --
        --  --  --  --  --  50  46  51  --  --  --  --  --  --  --
------------------------------------------------------------------
Priest  01  21  02  25  03  18  23  04  07  08  31  24  32  20  48
        51  29  17  42  22  30  26  43  19  37  34  27  39  28  --
        53  --  49  --  --  --  --  --  44  --  --  --  --  --  --
------------------------------------------------------------------
Ranger  01  17  25  02  29  03  18  04  06  30  26  22  33  37  23
        05  --  49  --  52  --  51  --  21  --  42  --  44  --  --
------------------------------------------------------------------
Monk    05  50  06  45  53  07  13  08  33  09  34  14  35  10  36
        --  --  54  --  --  --  48  --  --  --  --  --  --  --  --
------------------------------------------------------------------
Fighter --  --  52  --  --  09  --  --  13  --  --  11  --  --  15
------------------------------------------------------------------
Thief   --  --  --  41  --  --  42  --  --  18  --  --  08  --  --
------------------------------------------------------------------


          Maximum Magic Points at Different Levels by Class
                                LEVEL
             01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15

Wizard       10 11 11 12 13 14 14 15 16 16 17 17 18 19 20       
Priest       10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20 20 20 20
Ranger       08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 18 18 18 19
Monk         10 10 10 11 11 11 12 12 12 13 13 14 16 18 20
Fighter      07 07 08 08 09 09 10 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 18       
Thief        06 06 07 07 08 08 09 10 11 12 13 13 14 14 15


------------------------------------------------------------------


TREASURES
=========
          
 Treasures are held by monsters and retrieved by adventurers. Some 
items can be found in the armory, since adventurers are allowed to 
DISTRIBUTE AND SELL their captured treasures whenever they enter a 
town. Needless to state, Armories in different towns may carry 
different inventories (see TOWN section).
 Treasures fall into four general categories, classified by their 
use.

1. COMBAT EQUIPMENT

Combat equipment includes shields, armor, and weapons. Each of 
these items requires the owner to have a minimum strength level 
for that item : Higher level equipment can only be used by higher 
strength characters. The charts below list the items, their point 
values, and the strength requirements of the adventurer using 
them.

2. POTIONS

Potions are liquid substances, carried in vials, and taken by 
mouth (that is, you drink them). There are two types in PHANTASIE 
(I & II) :
 - HEALING POTIONS (Items #101 - #110) restore a character's hit 
points. They come in ten different strengths; the higher the 
number, the more points are restored.
          Healing 1 -  1 pt.       Healing  6 -  35 pts.
          Healing 2 -  4 pts.      Healing  7 -  49 pts.
          Healing 3 -  9 pts.      Healing  8 -  64 pts.
          Healing 4 - 16 pts.      Healing  9 -  81 pts.
          Healing 5 - 25 pts.      Healing 10 - 100 pts.
 - MAGIC POTIONS (Items #111 - #120) restore a character's magic 
points. They also come in ten different strengths, and work like
healing potions :
          Magic 1 -  3 pts.        Magic  6 - 18 pts.
          Magic 2 -  6 pts.        Magic  7 - 21 pts.
          Magic 3 -  9 pts.        Magic  8 - 24 pts.
          Magic 4 - 12 pts.        Magic  9 - 27 pts.
          Magic 5 - 15 pts.        Magic 10 - 30 pts.

3. SCROLLS

      A secret society has recorded important events concerning 
the Isle of Gelnor and its demise. The 20 scrolls have been 
scattered throughout the land - some hidden, some left in the care 
of trusted citizens (many of whom, unfortunately, have met with 
foul play). To the wise and knowledgeable, their contents hold the 
keys to restoring Gelnor to its former glory.

PLAYING HINT : Scrolls can only be read (used) in town (see Use 
Items in TOWN section).

4. MORE TREASURES

      OBJETS D'ART AND OTHER VALUABLES of vast wealth are said to 
be hoarded by Black Knights and monsters alike - gems, precious 
minerals, and glorious works of art - in addition to gold. One 
hears of magnificent sapphires, a golden ring of incredible 
workmanship, a large gold statue fashioned after an ox and 
encrusted with jewels ....
     RINGS AND WAND, according to rumours, are described in 
several scrolls, and they are significant to the plight of Gelnor.


------------------------------------------------------------------

TABLES OF COMBAT EQUIPMENT

------------------------------------------------------------------

                            WEAPONS

Item Point  Att.  Type          Item Point  Att.  Type  
 No. value Req'd*                No. value Req'd*

 41    0     2    Stick          71    3     2    Small mace +1
 42    1     4    Knife          72    4     4    Dagger +1
 43    1     6    Small club     73    4     4    Small mace +2
 44    2     8    Small staff    74    5     8    Dagger +2
 45    2    10    Small mace     75    6    10    Dagger +3
 46    3    12    Dagger         76    7    12    Staff +1
 47    3    14    Small flail    77    7    14    Dagger +4
 48    4    16    Club           78    8    16    Flail +1
 49    4    18    Mace           79    9    18    Spear +1
 50    5    20    Small hammer   80    10   20    Axe +1
 51    5    22    Small axe      81    10   22    Sword +1
 52    6    24    Staff          82    11   24    Sword +2
 53    6    26    Short sword    83    12   26    Sword +3
 54    7    28    Flail          84    13   28    Large axe +1
 55    7    30    Hammer         85    13   30    Sword +4
 56    8    32    Pitch fork     86    14   32    Sword +5
 57    8    34    Spear          87    15   34    Sword +6
 58    9    36    Axe            88    16   36    Halberd +1
 59    9    38    Sword          89    16   38    Sword +7
 60    10   40    Heavy mace     90    17   40    Halberd +2
 61    10   42    Maul           91    18   42    Halberd +3
 62    11   44    Trident        92    19   44    Sword +10
 63    11   46    Large spear    93    19   46    Halberd +4
 64    12   48    Large axe      94    20   48    Halberd +5
 65    12   50    Morning Star   95    21   50    Halberd +6
 66    13   52    Pike           96    22   52    Halberd +7
 67    13   54    Long sword     97    22   54    God knife
 68    14   56    Spetum         98    23   56    God mace
 69    14   58    Bardiche       99    24   58    God axe
 70    15   60    Halberd        100   25   60    God sword

------------------------------------------------------------------

Note : Items 97 to 100 (i.e. God weapons are all apecial magical
weapons.

------------------------------------------------------------------

* Att. Req'd (Attributes Required), refers to the values for 
strength and dexterity needed to effectively yield the weapon.
The number is derived from STRENGTH (STR) MULTIPLIED BY 2, PLUS 
DEXTERITY (DEX) , i.e. STR * 2 + DEX.

------------------------------------------------------------------

      SHIELDS                           ARMOR
    
Item Point  STR  Type          Item Point  STR   Type  
 No. value Req'd                No.  value Req'd

  1    1     1   Glove             21    1     2    Clothing     
  2    2     2   Wooden shield     22    2     4    Robes
  3    3     3   Wooden shield +1  23    3     6    Leather
  4    4     4   Small shield      24    4     8    Hard leather
  5    5     5   Small shield +1   25    5    10    Ring mail
  6    6     6   Small shield +2   26    6    12    Scale mail
  7    7     7   Small shield +3   27    7    14    Chain mail
  8    8     8   Medium shield     28    8    16    Splint mail
  9    9     9   Medium shield +1  29    9    18    Banded mail
 10   10    10   Medium shield +2  30    10   20    Plate mail
 11   11    11   Medium shield +3  31    2     0    Cloth +1
 12   12    12   Large shield      32    3     0    Robes +1
 13   13    13   Large shield +1   33    4     2    Leather +1
 14   14    14   Large shield +2   34    5     4    Leather +2
 15   15    15   Large shield +3   35    6     6    Ring mail +1
 16   16    16   Giant shield      36    7     8    Ring mail +2
 17   17    17   Giant shield +1   37    8    10    Chain mail +1
 18   18    18   Giant shield +2   38    9    12    Chain mail +2
 19   19    19   Giant shield +3   39    10   14    God robes
 20   20    20   God shield        40    11   16    God armor 

------------------------------------------------------------------

Note : God Robes, God Armor and God shield are all special magical 
items of great value.

------------------------------------------------------------------

PHANTASIE II UPDATED RULES
**************************

Phantasie I & II both share the same rules that have been set out 
in the previous text, with the following exceptions and changes 
for Phantasie II :

 - SCROLLS. In Gelnor (Phantasie I), there were 20 scrolls 
scattered about the land. In Ferronrah (Phantasie II), there are 
approximately 15.
 - RINGS AND WAND. In Phantasie I, 9 rings and a wand played an 
important role. In Phantasie II, amulets and an enchanted orb are 
the important artifacts.
 - COMBAT/ROCK TOSSING. The combat menu of Phantasie II contains a 
new feature : ' 7) Toss Rock '. Rocks may be thrown at any enemy 
rank. Each character has an unlimited supply of rocks. Accuracy 
with this new weapon upon the Toss Rock skill level of each 
individual character.


NEW TERRAIN FEATURES

 - MOLTEN LAVA; appears as an orange wave pattern. Extremely 
dangerous to travel through the intense heat; almost always causes 
damage to your characters. No encounters
 - MIST; appears as an area of blue dots. A fine mist shrouds 
these areas, making travel difficult. Undead and insect 
encounters abound.
 - DARK VOIDS; are considered dangerous to travel through. Again, 
undead and insects flourish in these areas.


TRANSFERRING CHARACTERS FROM PHANTASIE I TO PHANTASIE II

    Those of you who have played PHANTASIE I and still have your 
characters saved may use them in PHANTASIE II by selecting the 
Utilities function of the game (see UTILITY COMMANDS) and choosing 
Transfer characters from Phantasie I to Phantasie II".

Warning : This process will have the following adverse effects.

    Your characters must pay all items except the wand of 
Nikademus. They must also pay the majority of their money and will 
lose most of the experience they have accumulated and all spells 
except for any divine spells (#55 and above). Wizards will keep 
spell #5 and priests spell #1. If you decide to use your old 
characters in PHANTASIE II then "transfer characters" should be 
the first thing you do. At this point, you may wish to train the 
characters at the Guild as they will be at level 0, but have 
enough experience to improve. Any characters you have created 
beforehand on the Phantasie II disk will be erased by the transfer 
process.


