This is a two-part adventure, one part to a disk, and each disk is jammed
to the limit with detailed descriptions, scores of special effects, and
special programming.

The first part of Buccaneer! involves your escapades in the harbor
district of Evenhold. There is no specific quest here, but there are
dozens of things to get involved in. You can drink, fight, gamble,
steal, get arrested, get shanghaied, bribe your way into places you
don’t belong, attend the hanging of Henri Le Marque, make business
deals, hire a ship, crew it, prepare for a sea voyage, and many other
things as well. The general idea is to pick up some clues about the
whereabouts of Le Marque’s treasure, and prepare to put to sea in search
of the treasure in part two.

Part two is actually a completely separate adventure, with its own MAIN
PGM and text files. There is a transfer of information from part one, so
that part two uses the ship, crew, and artifacts that you obtained in
part one. Part two is an adventure on the Malphigian Sea, in which you
can sail to a half-dozen islands in search of treasure and adventures.
There is a lot that can happen while on the high seas, including
encounters with merchant ships, pirates, naval vessels, sea monsters,
uncharted reefs, storms, and mutinies. How well you fare will depend on
how complete your preparations were in part one. Every island is unique;
a mini-adventure in its own right. The sea is not structured into rooms,
but allows you to sail where you will; also, the sea is quite large and
requires expert navigation.

The seagoing adventure is unique in its execution. The effects are very
good, and the ship-to-ship battles are very well done and full of
surprises.