Eamon #108 "The Mines of Moria" Walkthrough by Jared Davis


You start on a path south of the Main Hall. You can go back, but if you
did, you might as well not have started at all! Go South, but not South
again. There are quite a few instant death traps, and this is the first.
Remember that this is Sam's first EAMON adventure. Early EAMON
adventures had a lot.

Go East. ARGH! A dead end? Come on? Let's take a closer LOOK! A door!
OPEN it! Oh, you can't! EXAMINE the DOOR! Yes! READ the WRITING! SAY "MY
FRIEND." Go East again!

Get the Staff and Light it. Go East. Go South and LOOK. Get the Key. Go
North and East. Here is a four-way intersection. To the north are some
spiders. If you're aching for some stuff to kill, go ahead. But, other
than that, there is nothing there. Go South. And South again! Okay, four
orcs. Time to get your weapon!

ATTACK the ORCs. If you're strong enough, you should come out with
minimal damage. If not, make use of the HEAL spell. Go West. Okay, here
is a SERGEANT, LIEUTENANT, and an ARCHER. Get the Orc-brew when you've
finished them off. Yes, it's a healing potion. You can also take their
weapons. You can sell them when you get back to the Main Hall.

LOOK. Examine the desk. Open it. Get the key. Head back to the
intersection. Go East twice. A gate and a crack. One of the keys you
found will open it. (I'm not sure which one.) Go North a couple of times
to meet a TROLL! Now to get some compadres! Go East and ATTACK the
GUARDS. FREE the DWARF. It's Gimli! Go West twice to ATTACK some URUK
HAI GUARDS. FREE the WIZARD. Ah, Gandalf! Head back to that crack.

JUMP over the crack! Go East! To the south is an army of ants protecting
a box. Kill them and ATTACK the BOX until it opens. (There may be a key,
but I never found it, or used it for this purpose.) When the box
shatters, OPEN it to GET some DIAMONDS. (No use in the game, but worth
mucho dinero when you return to the Main Hall.) Go North and JUMP over
the trap door! (If you go east, you fall in. But it's easy to get back
out. Just go UP!)

ATTACK the BAT. Go no further EAST, unless you want to die. Go North,
and LOOK for a keyhole in the wall. INSERT the GOLD KEY and PULL the
LEVER. I don't think Tolkien would've made an elevator, but it's okay.
Go Down and East, and don't go south. It seems to be the pit
from...upstairs? Go East and LOOK.

Go East and ATTACK the BOA, RATTLER, and COBRA. Get the Mining Tools.
Exit and go South. Go East and head to the south. Hmm, a noise. Maybe
you oughta turn back....

OR GO SOUTH TO MEET A DRAGON! ATTACK IT! ATTACK IT! ATTACK IT! Whew! You
might survive if you're pretty strong! (Faints.)

LOOK for the ARKENSTONE and GET ALL. (You can't move the dragon.) Head
back to the s/e/w intersection. Go East and OPEN the GATE. Go North.
ATTACK those LIZARDs! (In my game, I only had to kill two. Gimli and
Gandalf finished off the last one. Go EAST and MINE. GET the GEMS. Go
back West and go North. If you want, you can go East and MINE to uncover
a giant worm. Only if you wanna kill something!

LOOK. Go WEST. EXAMINE the PILLAR. Do you think something goes in that
depression? It must be made be a dwarf, so it must be a dwarvish item.
Hmm, what do you have that's dwarvish and only one piece? The ARKENSONE.
INSERT it. READ the WORDS. (And you can get the Arkenstone back!) SAY
NOW. Go West and LOOK. GET the KEY. OPEN the BOX to get DURIN'S AXE.

If you want to wake Durin, play the sequel, "RETURN TO MORIA."

Head back to the mines. Go North. MINE to go North. There is no turning
back here. Be sure you've done everything above. Okay. Go East, East,
and ATTACK the KRAKEN. Go Down and ATTACK the SHARK. (What is a shark
doing in a subterranean river?) Go East, East, and DOWN. OPEN the GATE.
Go East. To the north and south are orcs with names. No items. The same
when you go East. Go East again.

Once again, only enemies to the north and south. Go East twice. DON'T go
south. It starts a path leading to a death trap. Go EAST. ATTACK the
OLOG and URUK. GET the NECKLACE. Go West, and North. ATTACK the VAMPIRE.
(Note: Vampires are part of Middle-earth! Read "Silmarillion!") Go North
to meet an orc named CLUMSY. (Whenever I played, Clumsy became a
companion.)

Go East and ATTACK the ORC PATROLMAN. Go East and ATTACK HANK. Go East
and ATTACK AZOG. GET SKULLCLEAVER and the bag of GOLD. Congratulations!
You've just avenged Thror! Now you'll have to JUMP over the crack to the
South. Continue South.

Go East onto the Bridge of Khazad-dum. A Balrog!

Let me tell you right now, there is no point in trying to kill him.
Remember the book? Or that movie from 2001? BLAST the BALROG! The bridge
collapses and the Balrog goes bye-bye! Continue East twice out of Moria.
Go North and climb Down. Go East.

Try to OPEN the GATE. No good. What does it mean "It will open when you
approach?" Go East. Oof! Can't do that? Maybe a word can open it! But
what? What have you had since the beginning? No, it's not your weapons!
READ the LETTER. SAY ELBERETH. Go East.

Welcome to Lothlorien. You can go North to a tavern, but there's nothing
but an interesting room description. You can't get the drink they give
you. Go South (twice from the tavern) to meet an elf who wants to
exchange gifts. Sounds good. Now, how do you exchange? What's another
word for exchange? No, it's not GIVE! (Won't do you any good anyway.)
The word is TRADE! TRADE with him for PURE LEMBAS and a WOODEN CARVING.
GET ALL of them. Now go North and East.

Hey, Galadriel! She must be the person you GIVE the LETTER to! So, GIVE
the LETTER TO GALADRIEL! She sends you back to the Main Hall.