ESC leaves the title screen.

___

Kaves of Karkham is a sequel game to Dragon Fire, and takes the player into
the mysterious underground realm of Karkham. Your mission with a select crew
of adventurers is to enter these underground corridors, maneuver through traps
both natural & supernatural, and return a piece of the Demon Maldamereâ€™s gem
to the top of the mountain. Maldamere will do his best to stop you on your
way, as you have to overcome him and the many dormant spells which become
active once you enter Karkham.

The game is an adventure game in a 1st person perspective maze setting, which
is very similar to another Level-10 game, Alkemstone, also for the Apple II.
At the start, the game resembles many RPGs in that you have to choose your
character from one the four races, Warrior, Huntress, Elf, & Dwarf, though it
is not clear what advantages each have, except the Elf can use magic. After
this you have to select ten team members to aid you in this dangerous mission.
There will be fifteen to choose from, each having their own weapon, as well as
an individual object to assist in the mission, and you need to decide which
ones will be most useful. After this you arrive at the entrance of the Kaves,
where you have to unscramble the random password to enter the caves.

Once in the Kaves the view is a first perspective as you move around the maze.
You move around using the arrow and return keys, each location having simple
descriptions of what you discover and problems there maybe. The parser also
use two word commands to progress & overcome any difficulties on the way. The
first word will be from one of the verbs provided followed by a noun. As you
are the most important person in your party, it makes sense to command another
of the team to take any action, so if it fails they will die instead of you. A
high score table is also available to beat your previous time & improve your
score in subsequent games.

see https://www.sockscap64.com/games/game/kaves-of-karkhan/