                     BATTLES OF NAPOLEON
              Strategic Simulations, Inc. (SSI)       
                              
                        EDITOR RULES
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS
                              
                              
                              
14.0 SCENARIO EDITOR

ù Scenario Creation Process
ù Create A Random New Scenario
ù Scenario Creation Parameter and Explanations

15.0 ARMY EDITOR

ù Organization
ù Main Menu
ù Army Generator Menu
ù Editing an Army
ù Army Editor Summary

16.0 MAP EDITOR

ù Map Editor Main Menu
ù Map Editor 1st Menu
ù Map Editor 2nd Menu
ù Random Map Summary

17.0 DEPLOYMENT OF UNITS

ù Deployment Menu
ù Deployment Summary

18.0 SET SQUARES

ù Square Types
ù Set Square Menus

19.0 TABLES EDITOR

ù Tables Menu

20.0 CHARTS AND TABLES

ù Editor Tables
ù Terrain
ù Unit Data
ù Readiness Loss
ù Weapon/Range Casualty
ù Fire and Melee Strength Modifiers
ù Melee Mode
ù Additional Combat Modifiers
ù Rally
ù Operation Point
ù Fatigue
ù Efficiency
ù Disruption
ù Disruption Recovery
ù Leader Command Control Modifier
ù Cavalry Charge
ù Morale Test
ù Entering Square
ù OP Point Cost
ù Additional Costs


APPLE II AND IBM COMPATIBLE COMPUTER INFORMATION:

Many of our games will work on Apple II and IBM compatible
computers. Most of our games will work on an Apple II GS in the
Apple II emulation mode.

If you own an Apple II GS, Apple compatible or IBM compatible
computer we suggest that you consult with our Technical Hotline
at (415) 964-1200 any workday between the hours of 9 a.m. and 5
p.m., Pacific Time, to see if an SSI game you're considering
purchasing is compatible with your computer. If we have
insufficient data to determine compatibility, you may wish to
purchase the game and test for compatibility yourself. If the
game proves to be incompatible, you may return it within 14 days
with your dated receipt and we will refund your money. Or, if you
return the game within 30 days, you may exchange the game for
another.

BATTLE OF NAPOLEON
EDITOR RULES


14.0 SCENARIO EDITOR

The scenario Editor is a very powerful tool that will allow you
to build you own scenarios or modify existing ones. You can even
modify the tables that the program uses during the game execution
and the objectives that the computer solitaire player uses (see
section 19.0). However, because of its complexity, it is highly
recommended that you use the Editor only after you are fairly
familiar with the game system.

Before you can create a new scenario, even a random one, you must
have a blank disk ready. If it has not been formatted into an SSI
save disk, you will be prompted and told how to initialize the
disk for use by the Program. This blank disk is used by the
Editor as a place to store data during the scenario creation
process.

To access the Scenario Editor from the Main menu, choose "C" to
create a random new scenario, "G" to enter the Editor to generate
a new scenario, and "E" to edit a new scenario or saved game.

14.1 Scenario Creation Process

Whether you are creating a new scenario, editing an old one, or a
combination of the two, you must follow a very specific and fixed
path in the creation/editing of your scenario. The steps are as
follows:

Army Editing/ Building
Map Editing/ Building
Unit Deployment
Set Squares
Tables Editing

This path may not be altered and must be followed through to
completion. Once you have gone through all five steps with a
scenario, performing the necessary tasks in each, you will be
asked to input the name of the new scenario and the scenario will
be saved. If you skip any steps and you are not editing an
existing scenario, the information needed will be brought in from
the Quatre Bras scenario. For example, if you skipped deployment,
your units would be in identical X,Y positions to the Quatre Bras
scenario. It is highly recommended that you perform all the steps
before completing the scenario. Remember, though, that you may
always come back and edit the scenario.
Once at the end of the scenario creation process, you will be
prompted to rename the scenario. Because the scenario is
automatically saved under the name "NAP" during the creation
process, you should rename it to a name of your choosing.

14.2 Create a Random new Scenario

This option, when selected from the Main Menu will generate a
completely random scenario for instant enjoyment. When you select
this option, you will be prompted to have an SSI save disk ready.
The Editor must save the scenario files to the disk during the
creation process. If you do not have one ready, you may format
one during this step. The next option will ask you how many
selection points to use for the French side and then for the
Allied side. This represents the size of the forces involved (See
section 15.31 for a more thorough explanation of purchase
points). After the computer has generated the units to be used on
each side, it will save the army files to the save disk you used.
The computer will then prompt you for several disk swaps and will
save each part of the scenario as it is created. Once everything
is ready, the units will be deployed, the objectives will be set,
and you will be asked to rename the file. Because the file is
automatically saved under the name "NAP", you should now name
this file as desired. Once you have done this, the game will take
you to the Game Menu (see section 4.1) and the game will begin.

14.3 Scenario Creation Parameters and Explanations

Because of the complexity of the scenario Editor, it is
imperative that the basic concepts behind the Editor be
understood before using the Editor to create a scenario. In order
to preserve maximum flexibility, the Editor will allow you to
create whole scenarios of just parts of scenarios. As an example,
you could begin the scenario creation process by creating an
Allied army and a French arm and then save them off separately so
that you could use that army in another scenario. You can also
have the computer randomly generate any part of the scenario that
you wish. For instance, you could want to control the army
creation step, but want the computer to randomly generate the map
and deployment. Again, this is possible.

As a rule, if you are trying to create a new scenario from
scratch, you should follow all of the steps in sequence. You may
use the (R)andom function for sections you don't wish to create.
In addition, you should normally use the default settings for the
tables as these are to be considered "historical" in most
circumstances.

15.0 ARMY EDITOR

Upon entering the Editor, the first menu you will be presented
with will be the Main Menu for the Army Editor. This menu will
allow you to create the two side for the scenario you are
creating. At this point you should examine section 15.2, the Main
Menu description.

The first, and most important thing to learn about the Army
Editor is the concepts behind leaders and their command
structures. During the usage of the Army Editor, you will have to
go through three distinct steps: Leader Creation, Unit
Assignment, and Unit Creation.

During the Leader Creation step, you will choose the names,
levels of command, and bonus levels (0 to 15) for the leaders and
determine the order of which leaders report to which other
leaders. The most important thing to understand in the Leader
Creation step is how Leader Organization works. All leaders have
a higher level commander that they report to. This determines the
order of command and is more fully explained below.

In the unit Assignment step, you assign the units their names,
their sizes (from Batt. to Brig.), and tell them which leaders
they report to. This determines the Unit Organization.

Finally, you will give the specifics on each unit in the army
that you are editing, giving such details as number of men,
weapon, and so on.

15.1 Organization
In THE BATTLES OF NAPOLEON, as in history, all military
organizations are driven by Command Control. All units have
leaders that answer to their superior leaders. This organization
is the most difficult thing to understand in the Editor, and is
completely vital to the game.

Leaders are organized into a command structure that the game uses
during the Command Control phases of the game. In general, an
army will consist of an Army Commander, with 3 or 4 Corps
Commanders under him, with 2 or 3 Division Leaders under each of
the Corps Commanders. Because a number of strange organizations
occurred in historical situations, we have allowed the maximum
flexibility possible in the creation of the Leader Organization
of an army. Therefore, the computer assumes nothing in regards to
the Leader Organization. You must tell the computer which leaders
report to which other leaders and what command level they are.
You must put lower level commanders under the command of higher
level commanders. If you don't, the game will prompt you to
change the leaders that don't fit into the command structure when
you Reorganize (see 15.41).

There is a similar requirement for the Unit Organization. It is
imperative that all units be under the command of a leader. If
they aren't, then they will have no objectives and will become
independent units. This is a mistake because the number of OP
points received will be lower than normal and the "independent
units" will not be forced to obey "historical" restrictions.

15.11 HISTORICAL DESIGNATIONS AND ORGANIZATIONS
Although this editor will not prohibit you from creating non-
historical organizations, it is suggested that quasi-historical
organizations be used in most cases. Here are a few examples to
help you understand how to do that.

The sizes for units in THE BATTLES OF NAPOLEON go as follows:

Battalion - A group of men ranging from a couple of hundred to
over a thousand men in size. Battalions were generally organized
into Regiments (for the French and many Allies) or Brigades (for
the British).

Regiment - Generally a group of 2 to 5 battalions that operated
together. Several of the scenarios use demi-regiments (1/2
regiment units).

Brigade - This is the next level of command up from the Regiment.
Although the British generally didn't use Regiments for combat
organizations, they did use Brigades. Brigades usually consist of
2 regiments (or as many as 8 battalions for the British).

Division - This is the lowest level of command that one would
find operating alone in combat. Divisions consisted of 2 to 4
Brigades.

Corps - During the Napoleonic Era, the Corps was just a small
Army, often with integral artillery and cavalry units. A Corps
for the French usually consisted of 3 Infantry Divisions, 1
Cavalry Division, and an Artillery Division (however, artillery
were usually organized into Batteries of 6 - 12 guns or Grand
Batteries 30+ guns).

Army - This is the highest level of command ever found on a
battlefield. As such, there generally will only be 1 Army
Commander on each side during a battle. This is not a
requirement, however. Armies consist of multiple Corps.

15.2 Main Menu

The first menu you will reach upon entering the Editor is the
Main Menu for the Army Editor. This menu has the following
options:

(C)ontinue - This option takes you past the Army Editor and into
the Map Editor. It should only be selected once both the French
and Allied armies have been selected. There is a verification
question, so you will be asked Y/N before it proceeds.

(G)enerate Army - This is the option you select either to build
an army with Selection Points (see section 15.31) or to randomly
select one. Selecting this choice will take you to the Army
Generator Menu (see section 15.3).

(E)dit an Army - Choosing this will allow you to custom create a
new army, for either the French side or the Allied side (see
section 15.4).

(L)oad Army File - This option allows you to pull in an army file
from another scenario. This will allow you to use an army in
multiple situations without having to recreate the army several
times.

(S)ave Army File - This option allows you to save an army
separately from the scenario you are creating/ editing. This
allows you to make a disk full of armies for later use in other
scenarios (through use of the (L)oad Army File command).

15.3 Army Generator Menu

This sub-menu is where you will create armies, but not completely
from scratch. If you wish to generate an army with random
leaders, and a specific number of units (e.g., 20 Infantry, 5
cavalry, and 3 artillery) in a specific year of your choosing,
you should select the (G)eneral Standard Unit Selection from this
sub-menu. This will create an army quickly, but with some general
direction given. Note specifically that you may use Selection
Points (see section 15.31) to create this army and the computer
will try to create an army with the number of units you desire
but within the allotted point limit. If the point limit is
reached, the number of units may not be as you wished.

The (S)tandard Unit Selection option allows you to choose
standard units from the Standard Units Table (see section 20.3).
This method also allows usage of the Selection Points system and
is the best method for creating scenarios for two players.

(R)andom Generated Army is an option that creates a random army
of a specified size (again, Selection Points are use). In this
case, the computer will generate all of the necessary aspects of
the army, including the organization and unit types.

15.31 SELECTION POINTS
Selection Points are points used to purchase units for an army.
The question of whether or not to use the Selection Points method
of choosing units is presented as "Purchase Units (Y/N)". The
number of points to be used is determined by the player, and
generally should be equal for the two sides. The cost of a unit
in Selection Points is listed in the Unit Tables (section 20.3)
and is based on the number of men in the unit, their firepower,
Efficiency, and several other factors.

15.4 Editing an Army

Editing an army is, as previously mentioned, the most complex
part of the Editor program. The aforementioned three step process
must be done completely and correctly or the army will not
perform as desired.

15.41 LEADER CREATION
This is the first of the three parts of the army creation
process. During this stage, you will create the "chain-of-
command" for the army by naming all of the leaders, assigning the
leaders their leadership bonuses (see section 9,0), and telling
each leader who to report to. These factors must all be
completed, or leaders will not give the proper command-control to
their subordinates and objectives will be incorrect.

When the Leader Organizational Table first appears on the screen,
it will display either the table you are editing from a
previously created scenario, a randomly created table if you
chose the (G)eneral Standard Unit Selection (see section 15.3),
or the table from the Battle of Quatre Bras (if you are creating
a new, custom scenario) as sample data. You may rename any or all
of the leaders, change any or all of their bonuses, and reassign
the command structure.

The leader Organizational Table displays the vital information
about the army's leaders in two sets of four columns, with the
first column being the leader reference number (leader #, the
second column being the size of unit that the leader commands
(e.g., Napoleon is usually an ARMy commander and in Quatre Bras
in the French army, Bauduin is a BRiGade commander), the third
being the name of the leader, and the fourth being the leader #
that the leader in question answers to. This last column is very
important because it determines the chain of command.

Example:
The concept of telling each leader who his superior is very
simple as a concept, but is very complex in execution. As an
example, try generating a new scenario. Once you are to the Main
Menu of the army editor (as outlined above), you should choose
(E)dit Army. You are then asked whether you wish to edit an
Allied or a French army. Choose French. At this point, you are at
step 1 of the army creation process, the Leader Creation Step.
The Leader Organizational Table for the French forces at Quatre
Bras is the default data automatically loaded in by the editor,
and is convenient to use as an example. Before changing anything,
examine the table. First, you will notice that Ney is leader # 0,
has a SIZE of ARM (which means he is an ARMY commander), and his
SUPerior commander is Leader # 61 is reserved for leaders without
superiors, and therefore means that Ney answers to no one on the
field. He is the supreme commander for the French forces in this
battle.

Going down the list, you will find that there are two Corps
commander, Reille and Kellerman, who answer to Ney (their SUP #
is 0 and Ney is leader # 0). As a general rule, Corps commanders
usually have several divisions under them, each with two or three
brigades under them. However, Kellerman's Corps has but two units
under him, and they are BRIGades! This is because historically
only a small part of Kellerman's Corps was present at Quatre
Bras. This is only one example of the myriad of possible strange
situations that may occur in the Leader Creation Step.

The leader that are listed as ``X" with varying leader sizes and
bonuses are all unused leaders. They are assigned the name "X" in
order to allow them to be recognized as non-leaders by the
program.

The menu on the bottom of the Leader Organizational Table follows
all of the conventions used so far in the program. The first
letter of the desired command is highlighted to indicate that
pressing this key will activate the chose command. The commands
available are:

<SPACE> - moves the cursor from the current leader to the next
leader in the table.

(P)rior - moves the cursor from the current leader to the
previous leader in the table.

(C)ontinue - takes you from the Leader Creation step to the Unit
Organization step.

(E)xit to Main Menu - allows you to exit from the Leader Creation
Step back to the Main Menu of the Army Editor.

(R)eorganize Leaders - will automatically reorganize the chain of
command to prevent any impossible situations from occurring. This
step is performed automatically upon pressing the (C)ontinue key.

(S)ize - will cycle through the leader sizes until the
appropriate one is found. In order to continue going through the
leader sizes keep pressing the (S) key.

(B)onus - displays the Leadership Bonus for the leader in
question and allows you to change it by pressing the (B) key.

<RETURN> - allows you to edit the leader name. The maximum length
of a leader name is 8 characters. However, there is a total
character limit that cannot be exceeded. This limit is constantly
displayed in the lower right of the menu and is listed as # CHRS
LEFT. The number after this is the number of characters left for
the names of the leaders for the army being edited. In addition,
renaming a leader is how you get to change the leader's superior.
After renaming a leader, you are asked to type in the leader # of
the desired superior.

15.42 UNIT ORGANIZATION
The next step after the Leader Creation process is Unit
Organization. This step is reached by pressing the (C)ontinue Key
from the Leader Organizational Table menu listed above. The
computer will organize things for a moment and then you will be
presented with the Unit Organizational Table. The table looks
similar to the Leader Organizational Table, but with a few
changes. The leader information area is compressed, giving room
for the addition of two lines just above the menu. These lines
give the information necessary for each unit.

The unit information displayed shows the unit #, the unit size,
the unit name, the unit's superior leader, and the leader that is
attached to the unit, if any. For example, lets examine the unit
organizational table for our custom scenario example for above:

Example:
After finishing with the Leader Organizational Table in our
previous example, we hit the (C)ontinue key, and proceeded to the
Unit Organization step. When first presented with the Unit
Organization Table, we see the leaders we just edited listed in a
short form above, with a unit listing in the middle of the screen
and a menu below. The unit listing is the portion we will be
concerned with.

The unit listing should read as follows:

##   SIZE   NAME    SUP LDR   ATTACHED
0    BATT.  1/L2    HUSSON    HUSSON
This is the organizational information for the first unit in the
French army. This unit is unit # 0, a battalion, and is named
"1L/2", or the 1st Light Infantry Battalion of the 2nd Infantry
Regiment. The unit is commanded by General Husson, and the good
general is personally attached to this battalion. If, at this
point, we hit the "n" key, we will be presented with the
identical information for the next unit in the army, unit # 1.
This unit is also a BATTalion, but is named 2L/2. It is also
commanded by General Husson, but as the general cannot be in two
places at one time, he is not attached to this unit.

The menu at the bottom of the Unit Organizational Table is
similar to the one at the bottom of the Leader Organizational
Table, and uses the same conventions.

(C)ontinue - this allows you to proceed to the third step in the
army creation process, the editing of the individual units.

(G)oto - allows you to go to a specific unit number to edit it.
This prevents having to scroll through a huge army to find the
individual unit in question.

(N)ext unit - is the key used to scroll through the army one unit
at a time and takes you to the next unit in order of unit number.

(P)rior - is identical to (N)ext except that it works backwards,
scrolling you in reverse through the army.

(R)eorganize - is the step used to check for mistakes and
impossible situations in the army. This prevents a leader from
being attached to two units at once and such things. This step is
performed automatically whenever you his the (C)ontinue key.

(S)ize unit - allows you to change a unit's size from BATTalion
on up through BRIGade, if desired.

<RETURN> allows editing of the unit, and is needed to change the
unit name, superior leader, or attached leader.

(E)xit to Main Menu - provides a quick exit to the main menu. As
all information is held in memory, this is a non-destructive
exit.

Note that the names of the units cannot be longer than 8
characters in length and that the unit names on a side have a
specific limit on the number of characters usable. This Limit is
constantly displayed in the lower right corner of the menu, CHRS
LEFT: and is updated after each unit is edited. This limit may
not be changed or exceeded. Also note that, for computer design
reasons, each army is limited to 30 leaders and 90 units.

15.43 UNIT EDITOR
The unit editor is the final step in the Army Creation process,
and is the most detailed and demanding. In the unit editor you
will choose the number of men in each unit and every other
important piece of information about the unit. The items are as
follows:

UNIT # - shows the unit number, as defined above, and is the
reference number for the unit.

UNIT NAME - appears just to the right of the unit number and is
the name assigned during the Unit Organizational step.

# MEN - is the number of men in the unit. This number may not
exceed 3000. If this number is set to 0, then the unit will not
appear during the deployment step and is assumed to be an unused
unit.

# SKIRM. - represents the number of men in the unit capable of
skirmishing. This number may not exceed the number of men in the
unit.

GUNS: - is the number of artillery pieces in the unit. This
number may never exceed 30.

TYPE 1 - ranges from 0 to 2 and is an indicator of the type of
unit : 0 represents infantry, 1 cavalry, and 2 means artillery.

TYPE 2 - is the unit "form" and is used to differentiate various
types of troops. The chart of the type 2s is in section 20.1.

TYPE 3 - is reserved for special information about the unit, and
ranges from 0 to 28, with 28 being "no special". See section 20.1
for this chart.

NATION - Shows the unit's nationality and is a number ranging
from 1 to 18. See section 20.1 for the chart of nationalities.

WEAPON - displays what weapon the unit is armed with. Refer to
the chart in section 20.5 for a listing of weapons and their
weapon numbers.

MAX. EFF - is a simple numerical rendering of the maximum
Efficiency of the unit. This number ranges from 2 to 9, with 2
meaning the unit has a maximum Efficiency of 28 and 9 indicating
a maximum of 98 Efficiency. This in not the indicator of the
unit's starting Efficiency, but the maximum it could achieve
given time to rest. This allows for units to start "tired" or
"depleted" and then "regroup" during the game.

EFFICIENCY - is the starting Efficiency of the unit. The scale is
from 0 to 98.

FATIGUE - represents the amount of Fatigue the unit has to start
with. As most of the time the units will start fresh, this number
is often 0.

OP MODIFIER - is a bonus given to special units giving them more
OP points. This bonus ranges from 0 to 4, with only cavalry
usually getting the bonuses of 2 or higher. Light infantry often
will get an OP modifier of 1. This number may not be negative.

REINF. TURN - is the turn that the unit will appear on the maps
as a reinforcement . If this turn is set to 0 or 1, the unit will
start on the map. Otherwise, the unit will appear on the
specified turn at the specified reinforcement square, as set in
the set squares portion of the editor (see section 19.0).

REINF SQ - is the square where the unit will appear on the maps
as a reinforcement. This square should only be used by forces of
one side. It gets very busy when units of both sides appear as
reinforcements at the same reinforcement square.

MELEE VALUE - is a number ranging from 1 to 9 that represents the
relative melee strength of the unit. As a general rule, infantry
should range in value from 1 to 5, with 5 being the French
Imperial Guard or an equally skilled unit, and cavalry should go
from 6 to 9.

FORMATION - shows the initial formation of the unit. Refer to the
chart in section 20.1 for a summary of the formations and their
respective numbers.

DISRUPTION - allows you to start units with Disruption levels.
This should only be done in the case of scenarios where units
have theoretically already been in combat.

AMMO - provides a method for starting units with less than the
normal 7 shots of ammunition.

FACING - is the initial facing of the units and corresponds to
the compass in section 5.131.

READINESS - is the starting Readiness level for the unit. This
number ranges from 0 to 7 and should normally start at 5.

% SKIRM OUT - is the percentage of skirmishers deployed at the
beginning of the game. If you select this option, you will be
presented with the numbers 0-4, with each number representing a
25% increase in the skirmisher out percentage. Thus, if you
select 3, the unit will have 75% of its skirmishers deployed at
game start. This is reflected on the screen.

ROAD MODE - shows whether or not the unit begins the game in road
mode.

CAV RETREAT - option is only available to cavalry units (units
with a Type 1 number of 1) and simply allows you to start units
with this toggle set to yes.

ADVANCE - allows you to toggle the advance flag to yes.

FRONTLINE - provides a method for selecting which units in a
stack are frontline at game start.

SKRM IN/OUT - is, as the previous three items, a toggle that
tells whether or not skirmishers are deployed at game start. If
this toggle is set to N, no skirmishers will be deployed at game
start, regardless of the setting of the SKIRM OUT %.

The menu at the bottom uses the same conventions as the pervious
army editor menus. It offers 1 new option, (S)kip 5 items, which
allows you to move more rapidly through the unit to edit a
specific part of the unit's statistics.

15.5 Army Editor Summary

Once you hit the (C)ontinue key from the Unit Editor, you will be
sent back to the Army Editor Main Menu. At this menu you will be
able to edit another army, go back through the army you just
finished, or load in a separately saved army. Once you are
through editing both the French and the Allied armies, you may
hit the (C)ontinue key and you will proceed to the Map Editor.
Once you do this, you may not return to the Army Editor until the
scenario is complete. Of course, if you have made a mistake and
need to go back, the best way to do this is to finish the
scenario and then go back and re-edit the scenario, using the
Edit Scenario option from the Main Menu.


16.0 MAP EDITOR

The second step in building a scenario is in creating the map.
There are several options that you can choose here, ranging from
using a map that you have previously created and saved off
separately to having the computer create an instant map for you
to use. Random maps are recommended for any do-it yourself
scenarios that are not based on a specific historical event as
they are different every time and will make each scenario unique.

16.1 Map Editor Main Menu

The Map Editor Main Menu uses the following commands:

(C)ontinue - performs the same function as elsewhere in the
Editor program. It takes you out of the current Menu and on to
the next step in the editing process. In this case, it takes you
out of the Map Editor and on to the Deployment step.

(E)dit Map - allows you to edit an existing map and takes you to
the Map Edit 1st Menu (see 16.2).

(L)oad a Map - lets you bring in a map that was previously saved.
Remember that you must use the (S)ave Map command from this menu
in order to save the map separately from the scenario for use
with other scenarios. Otherwise, the map is integrated into the
scenario and is not usable with another scenario.

(N)ew Map - clears the current map, allows you to choose the map
size, and then takes you to the Map Edit 1st Menu (see 16.2). The
size of the map is limited to 1600 squares total, so if you
choose a size of greater than 40 squares in one direction, you
may be limited to less than 40 squares in the other direction.
The minimum map size is 12 by 12.

(R)andom Map - creates a new random map. This takes you to a
special sub-menu that will allow you to create another map, edit
the existing one, or save the existing one. See 16.4 for more
details.

(S)ave Map - allows you to save the map separately so that you
may then use it in future scenarios.

16.2 Map Editor 1st Menu

The menu reached by selecting either (E)dit Map or (N)ew Map is
the Map Editor 1st Menu (called the 1st Menu because there is a
2nd level of menu beneath this one). This menu allows you to
place any type of terrain on the map. The commands available are:

(N)ew Map- has the same effect as selecting this option from the
Map Editor Main Menu (see 16.1).

(E)xit - takes you back out to the Map Editor Main Menu.

(O)ther Map - allows you to examine the map from a "strategic"
view with little definition, but more viewing area. This is just
like the "strategic view" available during the game (see 6.09).

Add (T)errain - is the function you select to place a specific
terrain type in the cursor square. The square the cursor is in is
represented by the highlighted square. The cursor is moved by the
chosen movement compass (5.131). After selecting the square you
wish to change with the Add (T)errain key, the terrain type you
place is chosen by typing in the number of the terrain type you
want. The list of terrain types is available in section 20.1.

(A)uto Terrain - is a special option that allows you to rapidly
place many of the same terrain type. To enable this feature,
press the (A) key and then select the terrain type you wish to
place in the cursor location and other adjacent locations. Once
you input the terrain type, the desired terrain type will appear
in the cursor location and a special sub-menu will appear,
informing you that your only two options are to move the cursor,
placing the selected terrain type in the new square occupied by
the cursor, or to return to the 1st Menu. Once you return to the
1st Menu, the (A)uto feature is deselected, allowing you to move
the cursor without placing terrain.

(M)enu 2 - takes you to the Map Editor 2nd Menu (see section
16.3).

In addition to the above commands, there are several bits of
information listed on the Map Editor 1st Menu. They include the
terrain type and terrain number in the square currently occupied
by the cursor, the elevation of the square currently occupied by
the cursor, and the X,Y, coordinates of that square. For example,
if the following line was on the bottom of your Map Editor 1st
Menu:

TERRAIN: WOOD/RIDGE 55 (2) X,Y: 15,23
the information would mean that the cursor is currently in square
15,23 and that the square is a level (2) elevation woods/ridge
square with a terrain number of 55 (see section 20.2 for details
on the terrain types).

The Map Editor 2nd Menu is simply an extension of the 1st Menu
that allows several special functions.

16.3 Map Editor 2nd Menu

The Map Editor 2nd Menu is accessed through the 1st Menu and
assist you in building a map quickly and easily. It allows you to
build specific terrain features by telling the computer that you
want to place a road, and then tracing the path the road takes.
The computer will then automatically figure out the correct
terrain types for the turns you make, and place the appropriate
terrain type. The commands available are:

(R)eturn to Menu 1 - takes you back to the Map Editor 1st Menu.

Woods/Ri(D)ge - creates a wooded ridge. You can then trace the
path of the ridge and the computer will follow. Of course, if you
make a hill with this command, don't forget to raise the level of
the clear squares in the middle, otherwise the hill will simply
be a ring of ridge with a sunken center.

R(I)dge - is just like Woods/Ridge, but without the woods.

R(O)ad - allows you to lay a road. Remember that his road will
not go "over" hills automatically. You must do this manually. The
2nd Menu terrain will simply overwrite any terrain that is "run
over".

(S)tream - as road, but with a stream.

Ri (V)er - as stream, but with an impassable river.

(W)oods/Road - as with a road, but this time a wooded road.

S(U)nken Road - just like a road, but a sunken road instead.

Terrain is placed by selecting the desired terrain type and then
moving the cursor in the desired direction. The options offered
by the Editor, in regards to the direction you may move the
cursor once you have selected a terrain type, are the only legal
options for that terrain type.

16.4 Random Map

Random maps can be created by selecting the random map function
from the Map Editor Main Menu. Once you have selected this
function, you will be presented with a menu allowing you to set
various levels for the major terrain features. Setting the item
to level 1 will give you less of an item, while level 3 will give
you more.

16.5 Summary

At this point, you should have completed all army editing and any
map editing desired. The only remaining steps are deploying the
armies, modifying the tables if desired, and setting any
important squares needed. Pressing the (C)ontinue key from the
Map Editor Main Menu will take you directly into the Deployment
phase and will present you with the Deployment Main Menu.


17.0 DEPLOYMENT OF UNITS

The first menu that appears in the Deployment phase of the
editing procedure is the decision as to whether or not you wish
to (D)eploy Units or just (C)ontinue on to the Tables Editor. If
you choose (D)eploy Units, you will be presented with another
decision. In this case, you must decide whether to use (R)andom
Deployment or (M)ap Edge Deployment. Random deployment means that
the computer will deploy the units on the edges in a random
fashion whereas Map Edge Deployment allows you to choose which of
the four compass point (North, East, South, and West) the two
armies set up on. Once these questions have been answered, you
will be presented with the Deployment Menu.

17.1 Deployment Menu

The Deployment Menu is, for all intents and purposes, identical
to the Cursor Menu (section 6.0). In addition, once you access a
unit through use of the (SPACE) command, you will be presented
with a different menu with may similarities to the Command Menu
(section 6.2). The Deployment Menu commands are identical to 6.0
with the following exceptions:

(A)dd Unit - adds a unit to the map. This is only necessary if
you are editing a previously created scenario and you have added
units since the last time you edited the scenario. Then you may
use this command to add a specific unit to the cursor location.

(E)xit to Main Menu - takes you out to the Deployment Main Menu
where you may either choose to (D)eploy Units or (C)ontinue on to
the Squares Editor.

17.11 Deployment Sub-Menu

The Deployment Sub-Menu accessed by hitting (SPACE) while the
cursor is over a unit has the following options:

(R)oad Mode: - this is a toggle. The display directly to the
right of this command in the menu section of the screen displays
the current status of the unit. If you wish to change the unit in
question into or out of road mode, press the (R) key.

(S)et Mode: - this is also a toggle, just like Road Mode.
However, there are several modes, each corresponding to the
formations listed in section 6.35. To change the units mode,
select the (S) key and then choose the desired formation from the
formations listed.

(E)lim - is an option included to allow you to delete a unit that
shouldn't be on the map. This is only necessary if the scenario
is a previously created one being edited and there are units on
the map that were removed. In that case, use this option to
delete the unit in question.

(N)ext Unit - simply takes you from the unit you have currently
selected to the next highest unit in numerical order. For
instance, if you are editing unit #13, pressing the (N) key will
take you to unit # 14.

(U)nit - allows you to select the next unit in a square. This is
identical to the (U) command in the Command Menu (see section
6.1).

(Q)uit - takes you back to the Deployment Menu.

(D)ir: - allows you to change a unit's facing during the
deployment phase. The direction the unit is facing is displayed
just to the right of the (D)ir: on the menu.

To place a unit in a square, move the unit to the desired
position and hit (N)ext or (Q)uit.

In addition to the above commands, the Deployment Sub-Menu uses
the standard cursor information, to include the X,Y coordinates
and the chosen movement compass. See section 5.13 for details.

17.2 Deployment Summary

The deployment phase allows you to place the units for both side
on the map in a specific manner to allow recreation of specific
historical battle situations. Once deployment is complete,
pressing the (C)ontinue key will take you into the Squares
Editor. As before, you may not go back to a previous part of the
editor once you go on, but you may re-edit a scenario once you
have addressed all five parts to the editor.


18.0 SET SQUARES

Because the Editor is capable of creating scenarios of so many
varying types, there must be some way of saying that one
objective is worth more than another, where reinforcements come
in, and so on. Therefore, there is the Squares Editor. Using the
Squares Editor is known as "setting the squares" and this part of
the editing process called the Set Squares phase.

18.1 Square Types

The complete list of squares able to be changed in the Set
Squares phase is as follows:

Victory Squares - are how you choose the value of a square in
victory points. A square may be worth a lot to one side for
capture, but little or nothing to the other side for capture.
Rear Area - the computer opponent focuses its attack/defense on
these squares. It represents the supply source for the army.

Reinforcement Squares - are numbered 1 through 8 and should be
remembered in regards to the reinforcements created in the Army
Editor through use of the Reinf Turn and Reinf Square options.

Computer Defensive Lines - provide a method of telling the
computer three distinct lines which represent the places to put
its troops if winning, losing, or stalemating. They simply
provide a guideline to the computer opponent on where to line up
its troops.

Artillery Objectives - are again for the computer opponent and
allow you to set up locations where you would like a computer
opponent to move its artillery pieces.

Special Computer Objectives - provide a method of giving a
computer opponent some idea of priorities.

18.2 Square Set Menus

Although each of the square set options has its own menu, the
menus are almost identical. The total list of options is as
follows:

(E)xit - takes you directly out to the Set Squares Main Menu.

(1-9) or (0-8) moves - is just the chosen movement compass (see
section 5.131).

(N)ext - scrolls through the squares of the type you are
currently editing. For example, if you are editing Allied Victory
Square #4 and you hit (N), you will go to Allied Victory Square
#5.

(S)et Sq. - tells the editor to make the X,Y coordinates of the
square you are editing, Allied Victory Square #4 for example, and
change it to be that of the cursor location. This means that if
you move the cursor to 15,15 and then press the (S) key, you will
set the square in question at 15,15.

(G)o ToSQ.- Moves the cursor to the square being modified.

(C)ontinue - proceeds to the next type of square to edit. If, for
instance, you are editing the French Victory Squares and you hit
the (C) key, you will go on to the Allied Victory Squares. If you
do this on the last square type, it will put you back to the Set
Squares Main Menu.

(D)el - allows you to clear a square so that it doesn't exist.

In addition to the menu options, the X,Y location, terrain type,
and elevation of the square currently occupied by the cursor is
listed on the bottom line of the menu.

18.21 VICTORY SQUARES
When you are setting victory squares, you have certain
limitations. First, no square may have a victory point value of
more than 12700 points. In addition, there can only be 8
objectives on each side. When you initially enter the Set Squares
phase, the computer automatically assigns what it thinks are
reasonable objectives and victory squares. If you wish to change
them , you may. If you delete them, it assigns the deleted
victory square an X,Y location of 255,255.

18.22 REAR AREA SQUARES
The rear area squares are set automatically by the computer upon
entering the Set Squares phase. They represent the location of
the baggage train, or the direction enemy units would have to
travel to reach the baggage train, for the appropriate side.

18.23 REINFORCEMENT SQUARES
The 8 reinforcement squares may be used in order by forces of
either side. It is possible to have units from both sides appear
in the same reinforcement square, even on the same turn, so
special care must be taken to prevent such from happening, unless
this is a desired effect.

18.24 DEFENSIVE LINES
The defensive lines represent lines that the computer opponent
will use to set up its position. There are three lines for each
side and each line has four squares that form it. These lines are
chosen by the computer based upon the situation it finds itself
in and the strategy chosen. Note that the computer will
automatically set up an additional defensive line around the rear
area square if the area is threatened.

Each line is made up of 4 points. These points form an intended
line, usually shaped rather like a small hill, with the first
point being to the left and back from the center. The second
point is straight to the left of the center of the line, the
third point is straight to the right of the center, and the
fourth point should be to the right and back from the center.
Thus, the line will have flanks that pull back, making a flanking
maneuver more difficult.

The computer will automatically select these objectives when the
Set Squares phase is initially entered; it is not necessary to
set defensive lines. This option is only to allow maximum
possible flexibility in the design of a scenario.

18.25 ARTILLERY OBJECTIVES
This is again a computer opponent function that is included to
give you some extra control in setting objective for computer
controlled artillery pieces. Computer controlled artillery will
try to go to the artillery objectives whenever possible.

18.26 SPECIAL OBJECTIVES
Special Objectives refer to special computer opponent objectives,
not victory objectives. They are squares that the computer will
try to take and hold, allowing you to make a square that is not a
victory square a place that the computer will try to take or
hold. The computer opponent will always try to take victory
objectives, so these are just extra objectives.


19.0 TABLES EDITOR

The Tables Editor is the last part of the Editor and is where you
can change the actual "guts" of the game system, from the effect
of town on melee combat to the victory points needed to obtain
various levels of victory. The Tables Editor Main Menu allows you
to load tables saved off separately from a scenario, in much the
same way as the map files can be saved separately (see section
16.0). Once you choose the (E)dit tables option, you will be
presented with the Tables Menu.

19.1 Tables Menu

The Tables Menu is a large menu with options to change virtually
everything within the program. All options on this menu are
accessed by the letter to the left of the desired option. For
instance, if you wish to change the Weapon Range Table, you press
the letter "D" from the Tables Menu and the Weapon Range Table
will appear. "Q" gets you back to the Tables Main Menu.

The options on the Tables Menu are:

A) # Game Turns

This allows you to change the number of game turns that the game
will last. Each turn in 1/2 hour in length. The game will end
after the last turn is over.

The maximum number of turns during a day that a game may last is
listed in the editor charts (see 20.1). This number of turns
varies with the month, based on the amount of daylight available
for fighting. If the game is to exceed one day, simply plan for
the number of daylight turns, then one night turn, and then the
appropriate number of turns on the next day. During the night
turn, there are certain restrictions. These are listed under the
Battle Time Chart in section 20.1.

B) Time

Selecting "B" will show the year, month, and day of the battle,
as well as the start time. All of these options may be changed.
When you enter the Time Sub Menu, you will automatically be
prompted for the new data. The time is in 1/2 hour increments,
starting at 12 midnight (time point 0). Thus if the game starts
on time point 23, the time is 11:30 AM.

C) Victory Points - Casualties

The sub-menu for this table will allow you to change the number
of victory points awarded for casualties to Infantry, Cavalry,
and Artillery. To modify a given victory level, simply press the
"RETURN" key when the highlight bar is over the desired victory
level.

D) Weapon/Range Table

This table allows you to change the firepower values for all of
the weapons in the game at the various ranges. If, for example,
you wanted to compress the scale of the game such that each
square was 200 meters instead of 100, you could simply halve the
ranges of all of the weapons and you will achieve that result.
If, on the other hand, you want to try experimenting with a
better form of shot for the French howitzers, you can do that
too. It is recommended, however, that you do not change the
number too much from the "historical " norm that they default to.
Any extraordinary changes will yield possibly strange results.
Use this option with care and planning.

Note that weapon 3 (SBR or Sabre) is reserved for non-firing
weapons and may not be turned into a firing weapon. Any units
equipped with this weapon will be unable to fire. In addition,
weapon 2 is reserved for small cavalry rifles. All CRB
restrictions will continue to apply.

(E) Weapon Name Table

This will allow you to actually replace certain weapons with
other weapons when used in combination with a change in the
Weapon/Range Table. An example would be replacing all of the L18
(weapon number 13) cannons with LB for longbow) to see how a
longbow armed unit would perform against a unit of musket armed
infantry. The value place in the Weapon/Range Table would have to
be derived by a method of your own choosing, but experimentation
will eventually yield a desired result.

F) Terrain Cost Table

Modifying this table will change the OP point costs for units to
enter squares of the various terrain types. Any changes made to
this table will supersede the table in the charts section (see
section 20.15). Any cost >15 will make the terrain impassable.

G) Target Terrain Fire/Melee Table

These are the percentage modifiers to the firer's firepower based
on the terrain in the target's square. If the woods in the
scenario you are designing were much better cover than the ones
in the game, just change the table and watch the result. As
above, any changes made in this table will supersede the table in
section 20.6.

H) Firing Unit Terrain Fire/Melee Table

This is identical to the Target Table above, but applies to the
terrain in the firer's square.

I) Melee Mode Table

The modifiers here are the melee strength percentage modifiers
based on the two modes (formations) of the units involved . On
the left side of the table, are listed the attacker's possible
formations while on the right are the percentage modifiers based
on the target's formation, as listed in the upper right corner of
the screen. For example, when you first select this option, the
screen should list the DEF'S MODE: as LINE and the modifiers
should be 100 if the attacker is in Line formation, 180 if the
attacker is in column, and so on.

J) Fire Mode Modifier Table

This table lists the firepower percentage modifier, for both the
firing unit and the target unit, based on formation (or mode).
For example, if a column unit fires at a column unit, the firing
unit has its firepower multiplied first by 30% for the firer
being in column and then by 150% for the target being in column.
Of course, this example is based on no changes to the tables. you
may use this option to alter these modifiers. Anything set to 01
may not fire.

K) Priority Direction Retreat Table

There are eight directions that units may retreat. Since it is
generally desired that your units retreat away from the enemy and
towards friendly lines, the computer has a priority list of what
direction to try to retreat in first. If that direction is
blocked, it will try the next best direction and so on. However,
you may have a special reason for wanting units to retreat in
other than the most advantageous direction (or you may feel that
another direction is more advantageous). This table allows you to
control the priority of retreat direction. Note that this table
uses the normal keypad.

L) Command Control Table

This table allows the player to change the range modifier for
leaders when determining a unit's Command Control rating (which
ranges from 10-30) during the Command Control Phase. Lower level
leader (Regiment or Brigade) usually have more control of a unit,
so their numbers in this table should be higher than a superior
level leader (Division, Corps, or Army). Note that for every
squares away from its leader, the computer adds a random modifier
that reduces a unit's Command Control rating.

M) Victory Levels

The sub-menu for this table will allow you to change the number
of victory points required to achieve the various victory levels.
To modify a given victory level, simply press the "M" key when
the highlight bar is over the desire victory level.

N) Minimum # Men for Elimination

When a unit takes enough damage, it loses all cohesiveness and
ceases to exist as a fighting unit, regardless of the durability
of the remaining individuals. Therefore, there is a threshold of
number of men remaining in the unit at which all units are
automatically eliminated. It defaults to 40, meaning that if an
infantry unit is at only 50 men and takes 10 casualties, it is
eliminated instead, causing 50 casualties.

O) Random # to Attempt Cavalry Charge

This is simply a random modifier shift that will allow you to
control whether or not cavalry charges happen very often. If you
don't like cavalry charges and feel that cavalry should charge
less often, then just change the random modifier to 140. If you
feel the opposite, then just change the modifier to 60.

P) Random # Infantry Enter Square

This one is identical to the random modifier for cavalry, but it
applies instead to the chance of forming square. If you move the
modifier on this one up and turn the modifier on the cavalry
charges down, cavalry will become very ineffective.
                     BATTLES OF NAPOLEON
                              
                      CHARTS AND TABLES
                              
                              
                        EDITOR TABLES
                           TERRAIN
                          UNIT DATA
                       READINESS LOSS
                    WEAPON/RANGE CASUALTY
              FIRE AND MELEE STRENGTH MODIFIERS
                         MELEE MODE
                 ADDITIONAL COMBAT MODIFIERS
                            RALLY
                       OPERATION POINT
                           FATIGUE
                         EFFICIENCY
                         DISRUPTION
                     DISRUPTION RECOVERY
               LEADER COMMAND CONTROL MODIFIER
                       CAVALRY CHARGE
                         MORALE TEST
                       ENTERING SQUARE
                        OP POINT COST
                       ADDITIONAL COST
20.0 CHARTS AND TABLES

20.1 Editor Tables

TYPE 1:
#    TYPE
0    Infantry
1    Cavalry
2    Artillery

TYPE 2:
#    TYPE
0    LN (Line) - Normal line units of any type (infantry, cavalry
or artillery)
1    LT (light) - Light units, either infantry or cavalry --
Normally all skirmishers if infantry
2    HV (Heavy) -Heavier cavalry units, such as Heavy Dragoons or
cuirassier, or heavy  artillery
3    FT (Foot) - Foot artillery (the guns were towed by horses
but the gunners  usually walked)
4    HS (Horse) - Horse artillery (both the guns and the gunners
were transported by  horse)
5    OG (Old Guard) - Crack French Imperial Guard troops - The
best French infantry
6    MG (Middle Guard) - Crack French Imperial Guard The next
best French infantry
7    YG (Young Guard) - lower quality skirmishers, these troops
were Guards only in name
8    GR (Grenadier) - Elite infantry
9    JG (Jaeger) - German or Russian skirmish infantry
10   LW (Landwehr) - Levy infantry, generally of very poor
quality
11   MI (Militia) - 3rd rate troops, they were poorly equipped
and trained
12   MD (Medium)
13   KG (King's German Legion) - German troops employed by the
British
14   FU (Fusilier) - Non-elite infantry
15   HI (Highland) - Scottish troops employed by the British
16   RI (Rifle) - Infantry armed with a rifle, as opposed to the
normal musket
17   GD (Guard) - Elite troops of any nationality were generally
referred to as Guards

TYPE 3:

#    TYPE
0    CH (Chausseurs) - Light cavalry
1    HU (Hussars) - Light cavalry
2    LA (Lancers) - light cavalry armed with lances to assist in
melee against bayonet and armed
     infantry
3    DR (Dragoon) - Cavalry often armed with muskets as well as
sabres
4    CU (Cuirassier) - Heavy cavalry, armed with sabres and
armored
5     CA (Carabiniers) - Heavy cavalry
6    CR (Corps Reserve) - Artillery units designated as Corps
Reserve
7    HV (Heavy) - Used with any troop type needing a heavy
Designation
8    FI (Field) - Used to differentiate horse artillery from
field artillery
9    GR (Grenadier) - Elite infantry
10   ED (Empress Dragoons) - Elite Heavy Dragoons
11   PL (Polish Lancers) - Used by the French, the Polish were
the first lancers
12   DL (Dutch Lancers) - Light Dutch cavalry armed with lances
13   GE (German) - German troops
14   HU (Hungarian) - Hungarian Troops
15   CV (Chevauleger) - A generic term referring to Light Cavalry
16   UH (Uhlan) - Light cavalry
17   PT (Position) - Positioned artillery, such as the Austrians
sometimes used
18   RR (Regimental Reserve) - Reserve artillery
19   FA (Fast) - Horse artillery that are treated more like foot
because of lack of training
20   MU (Musketeer) - Russian line infantry
21   FU (Fusilier) - Non-elite infantry
22   JG (Jaeger) - German or Russian skirmish infantry
23   CO (Cossack) - Russian light cavalry that was skilled in
"harassment" attacks
24   HO (Household) - British elite cavalry
25   RD (Royal Dragoon) - British elite cavalry, but armed only
with sabre (unlike normal
     Dragoons)
26   LD (Light Dragoon) - Light cavalry
27   GD (Guard) - Elite troops of any type
28   none


NATIONALITY:
#    NATIONALITY
0    FR (France)
1    SW (Switzerland)
2    NI (Northern Italy)
3    NA (Naples)
4    WE (Westphalia)
5    PO (Poland)
6    BA (Bavaria)
7    WU (Wuttenburg)
8    SA (Saxony)
9    AU (Austria)
10   RU (Russia)
11   PR (Prussia)
12   GB (Great Britain)
13   SP (Spain)
14   NE (Netherlands)
15   HA (Hannover)
16   BW (Brunswick)
17   PG (Portugal)
18   SD (Sweden)


FORMATION:
#         FORMATION
0         Line (Infantry)
1         Column (Infantry)
2         Square (Infantry)
3         Charge (Cavalry)
4         Counter-Charge (Cavalry)
5         Limbered (Artillery)
6         Unlimbered (Artillery)
7         Normal (Cavalry)
8         Rout (Cavalry and Infantry)
9         Dismounted (Cavalry(Non-sabre armed only ))
10        Open (All)


BATTLE TIME:
MONTH     MONTH #        START     END       HOURS OF
                         TIME      TIME      COMBAT
JAN       1              6:00      18:00     13
FEB       2              6:00      19:00     14
MAR       3              5:00      19:00     15
APR       4              5:00      20:00     16
MAY       5              4:00      20:00     17
JUN       6              4:00      21:00     18
JUL       7              5:00      21:00     17
AUG       8              5:00      20:00     16
SEPT      9              6:00      20:00     15
OCT       10             6:00      19:00     14
NOV       11             7:00      19:00     13
DEC       12             7:00      18:00     12

NOTE
ù CAVALRY may not charge at night. ù Night turns last one turn
between the end time of one day and the beginning of another day.
ù All movement and combat actions cost double OP points at night.
ù LOS is restricted to a maximum of 3 squares at night.

DATE OF BATTLE:
DATE      YEAR OF        DATE      YEAR OF
          BATTLE                   BATTLE
1805      0              1811      6
1806      1              1812      7
1807      2              1813      8
1808      3              1814      9
1809      4              1815      10
1810      5

20.2 Terrain Table

Terrain Type        Terrain Elev.  Terrain #
Bridge-Horizontal      1             15
Bridge-Horizontal      3             16
Bridge-Vertical        1             17
Bridge-Vertical        3             18
Clear                  1             0
Clear                  3             1
Clear                  5             2
Fields                 1             9
Fields                 3             10
Fields                 5             11
Hilltop                3             61
Hilltop                5             62
Redoubt - Horizontal   1             80
Redoubt - Horizontal   3             81
Redoubt - Horizontal   5             82
Redoubt - Vertical     1             77
Redoubt - Vertical     3             78
Redoubt - Vertical     5             79
Ridge - Horizontal     2             37
Ridge - Horizontal     4             38
Ridge - Left to Lower  2             45
Ridge - Left to Lower  4             46
Ridge - Left to Upper  2             41
Ridge - Left to Upper  4             42
Ridge - Right to Lower 2             47
Ridge - Right to Lower 4             48
Ridge - Right to Upper 2             43
Ridge -Right to Upper  4             44
Ridge - Vertical       2             39
Ridge - Vertical       4             40
River - Horizontal     1             31
River - Left to Lower  1             36
River - Left to Upper  1             33
River - Right to Lower 1             35
River - Right to Upper 1             34
River - Vertical       1             32
River Branch - Left-Right-Down       1       75
River Branch - Left-Right-Up         1       74
River Branch - Up-Left-Down          1       76
River Branch - Up-Right-Down         1       95
Road - Horizontal      1             99
Road - Horizontal      3             100
Road - Horizontal      5             101
Road - Left to Lower   1             114
Road - Left to Lower   3             115
Road - Left to Lower   5             116
Road - Left to Upper   1             102
Road - Left to Upper   3             103
Road - Left to Upper   5             104
Road - Right to Lower  1             108
Road - Right to Lower  3             109
Road - Right to Lower  5             110
Road - Right to Upper  1             111
Road - Right to Upper  3             112
Road - Right to Upper  5             113
Road - Vertical        1             105
Road - Vertical        3             106
Road - Vertical        5             107
Road across Ridge - Horizontal       2       83
Road across Ridge - Horizontal       4       84
Road across Ridge - Vertical         2       85
Road across Ridge - Vertical         4       86
Road Branch - Left-Right-Down        1       96
Road Branch - Left-Right-Down        3       97
Road Branch - Left-Right-Down        5       98
Road Branch - Left-Right-Up          1       93
Road Branch - Left-Right-Up          3       94
Road Branch - Up-Left-Down           1       90
Road Branch - Up-Left-Down           3       91
Road Branch - Up-Left-Down           5       92
Road Branch - Up-Right-Down          1       87
Road Branch - Up-Right-Down          3       88
Road Branch - Up-Right-Down          5       89
Stream - Horizontal    1             19
Stream - Horizontal    3             20
Stream - Left to Lower 1             27
Stream - Left to Lower 3             28
Stream - Left to Upper 1             23
Stream - Left to Upper 3             24
Stream - Right to Lower              1       29
Stream - Right to Lower              3       30
Stream - Right to Upper              1       25
Stream - Right to Upper              3       26
Stream - Vertical      1             21
Stream - Vertical      3             22
Sunken Road - Horizontal             1       63
Sunken Road - Horizontal             3       64
Sunken Road - Left to Lower          3       73
Sunken Road - Left to Upper          1       65
Sunken Road - Left to Upper          3       66
Sunken Road - Right to Lower         1       69
Sunken Road - Right to Lower         3       70
Sunken Road - Right to Upper         1       71
Sunken Road - Right to Upper         3       72
Sunken Road - Vertical 1             67
Sunken Road - Vertical 3             68
Swamp                  1             12
Swamp                  3             13
Town                   1             3
Town                   3             4
Town                   5             5
Wooded Ridge - Horizontal            2       49
Wooded Ridge - Horizontal            4       50
Wooded Ridge - Left to Lower         2       57
Wooded Ridge - Left to Lower         4       58
Wooded Ridge - Left to Upper         2       53
Wooded Ridge - Left to Upper         4       54
Wooded Ridge - Right to Lower        2       59
Wooded Ridge - Right to Lower        4       60
Wooded Ridge - Right to Upper        1       125
Wooded Ridge - Right to Upper        2       55
Wooded Ridge - Right to Upper        3       126
Wooded Ridge - Right to Upper        4       56
Wooded Ridge - Vertical              2       51
Wooded Ridge - Vertical              4       52
Wooded Road - Horizontal             1       117
Wooded Road - Horizontal             3       118
Wooded Road - Left to Lower          1       127
Wooded Road - Left to Lower          3       14
Wooded Road - Left to Upper          1       119
Wooded Road - Left to Upper          3       120
Wooded Road - Right to Lower         1       123
Wooded Road - Right to Lower         3       124
Wooded Road - Vertical 1             121
Wooded Road - Vertical 3             122
Woods                  1             6
Woods                  3             7
Woods                  5             8


20.3 Unit Data
                                 # Guns/       Max       OP Pt
Purchase
Unit #    Nation  Date Type 1    Type 2   Type 3   # Men  Skirm
Eff  Melee   Mod  Weapon    Points
0    0    0  0    0    28   1107 123  4   3    1   0      43
1    0    0  0    1    28   1107 1107 4   3    2   0      63
2    0    2  0    0    28   758  123  4   3    1   0      30
3    0    2  0    1    28   738  738  4   3    2   0      42
4    0    8  0    0    28   480  80   3   3    1   0      19
5    0    8  0    1    28   480  480  3   3    2   0      27
6    0    10 0    0    28   600  200  4   3    1   0      25
7    0    10 0    1    28   600  600  4   3    2   0      34
8    0    0  1    1    0    640  0    3   5    4   3      87
9    0    8  1    1    0    360  0    3   5    4   3      49
10   0    10 1    1    0    500  0    3   5    4   3      68
11   0    0  1    1    1    640  0    5   6    4   3      99
12   0    8  1    1    1    480  0    5   7    4   3      81
13   0    10 1    1    1    500  0    5   6    4   3      78
14   0    4  1    1    2    640  0    4   6    4   3      91
15   0    8  1    1    2    400  0    4   7    4   3      62
16   0    10 1    1    2    420  0    4   7    4   3      65
17   0    0  1    2    3    640  0    4   7    3   2      103
18   0    8  1    2    3    480  0    4   7    3   2      78
19   0    10 1    2    3    550  0    4   7    3   2      90
20   0    0  1    2    4    640  0    5   8    3   3      107
21   0    8  1    2    4    320  0    5   8    3   3      54
22   0    10 1    2    4    340  0    6   8    3   3      58
23   0    0  1    2    5    640  0    6   8    3   3      110
24   0    8  1    2    5    300  0    5   8    3   3      50
25   0    10 1    2    5    420  0    6   8    3   3      72
26   0    0  2    3    6    140  8    3   3    2   18     133
27   0    0  2    3    7    120  8    3   3    2   19     111
28   0    0  2    3    8    120  8    3   3    2   23     82
29   0    0  2    4    28   96   6    4   3    2   8      53
30   0    0  0    5    28   640  640  7   6    2   0      44
31   0    2  0    6    28   640  640  6   9    2   0      41
32   0    6  0    6    28   720  720  6   4    2   0      46
33   0    3  0    7    28   640  640  5   4    2   0      40
34   0    10 0    7    28   480  480  5   4    2   0      30
35   0    0  1    17   9    1000 0    7   8    3   3      174
36   0    10 1    17   9    800  0    7   8    3   3      139
37   0    0  1    17   0    1200 0    7   7    3   3      205
38   0    1  1    17   10   1000 0    6   7    3   2      178
39   0    10 1    17   10   800  0    6   7    3   2      142
40   0    3  1    17   11   1000 0    7   7    4   3      174
41   0    3  1    17   12   1000 0    6   7    4   3      171
42   0    8  1    17   12   1600 0    5   6    4   3      248
43   0    8  1    17   2    800  0    6   7    4   3      137
44   0    10 1    17   2    920  0    7   7    4   3      160
45   0    0  2    5    28   140  8    7   3    2   18     154
46   1    0  0    0    28   738  123  4   4    1   0      31
47   1    4  0    0    28   1000 250  4   4    1   0      43
48   13   3  0    0    28   480  80   3   3    0   0      19
49   13   3  0    17   27   720  720  4   3    1   0      40
50   13   3  1    17   1    480  0    4   5    4   3      67
51   13   3  1    2    28   320  0    3   6    3   3      44
52   13   3  1    1    2    240  0    3   5    3   3      32
53   2    0  0    0    28   738  123  2   3    1   0      29
54   2    0  0    1    28   720  720  2   3    2   0      39
55   2    0  0    17   9    800  800  4   4    1   0      45
56   2    0  0    17   28   640  640  4   3    2   0      36
57   2    0  1    1    0    480  0    3   4    4   3      64
58   2    0  1    2    3    640  0    4   6    3   2      95
59   2    0  1    17   3    400  0    5   6    3   2      65
60   2    0  1    17   27   310  0    6   7    3   2      54
61   2    0  2    2    28   120  8    2   3    2   19     109
62   2    0  2    4    28   90   6    2   3    2   28     71
63   3    3  0    0    28   480  160  1   3    0   0      17
64   3    3  0    1    28   480  480  1   3    1   0      25
65   3    3  4    0    9    480  480  2   3    0   0      25
66   3    3  0    17   9    640  640  3   4    1   0      36
67   3    3  0    17   28   600  600  3   3    0   0      32
68   3    3  1    1    15   320  0    3   4    4   3      43
69   3    3  1    1    0    320  0    3   4    4   3      43
70   3    3  1    17   2    480  0    3   5    4   3      65
71   3    3  1    17   15   480  0    3   4    4   3      64
72   3    3  1    17   1    480  0    3   4    4   3      64
73   3    3  1    17   4    480  0    5   8    3   3      78
74   3    3  1    17   3    480  0    5   5    3   2      76
75   3    3  1    17   28   480  0    5   7    3   2      84
76   3    3  2    12   0    120  8    2   3    2   8      38
77   3    3  2    4    0    94   6    2   3    2   23     80
78   4    1  0    0    28   738  123  2   3    1   0      29
79   4    1  0    1    28   738  738  2   3    2   0      40
80   4    1  0    17   9    800  800  3   3    1   0      43
81   4    1  0    17   22   800  800  3   3    2   1      46
82   4    1  1    1    0    480  0    2   4    4   3      62
83   4    1  1    1    1    480  0    2   4    4   3      62
84   4    1  1    2    4    640  0    3   8    3   3      97
85   4    1  1    17   2    480  0    4   5    3   3      65
86   4    1  1    17   1    480  0    4   5    4   3      67
87   5    2  0    0    28   738  123  4   3    1   0      30
88   5    2  0    1    28   738  738  4   3    2   0      39
89   5    2  1    1    1    480  0    4   5    4   3      67
90   5    2  1    1    0    480  0    4   4    4   3      65
91   5    2  1    1    2    480  0    5   6    4   3      74
92   5    2  1    2    4    560  0    6   8    3   3      96
93   5    2  2    12   28   120  8    3   3    2   24     82
94   5    2  2    4    28   95   6    3   3    2   28     72
95   6    0  0    0    28   738  123  2   3    0   0      28
96   6    0  0    1    28   720  720  2   3    1   0      35
97   6    0  0    10   28   480  0    0   3    0   0      16
98   6    10 0    17   9    840  840  5   3    1   0      48
99   6    10 1    2    4    720  0    5   8    3   3      121
100  6    0  1    2    3    480  0    4   6    3   2      73
101  6    3  1    1    15   720  0    4   5    3   3      98
102  6    9  1    1    1    720  0    4   5    4   3      100
103  6    9  1    1    16   720  0    4   5    4   3      100
104  6    10 1    17   17   720  0    7   8    3   3      125
105  6    0  2    1    28   110  7    2   3    2   23     70
106  6    0  2    12   28   120  7    2   3    2   6      77
107  6    0  2    2    28   140  8    2   3    2   4      124
108  7    0  0    0    28   738  123  2   3    0   0      28
109  7    3  0    0    20   640  640  2   3    0   0      33
110  7    3  0    1    21   640  640  2   3    1   0      34
111  7    3  0    10   28   640  0    1   3    0   0      22
112  7    3  0    1    22   640  640  2   3    1   1      35
113  7    3  1    1    0    480  0    3   4    4   3      64
114  7    3  1    1    15   480  0    3   5    3   3      64
115  7    3  1    2    3    640  0    4   6    3   2      95
116  7    3  2    12   28   120  6    2   3    2   23     62
117  7    3  2    4    28   100  6    2   3    2   24     60
118  7    3  0    17   9    640  640  6   4    1   0      40
119  7    7  1    17   27   640  0    6   8    3   3      109
120  7    3  2    17   28   130  6    4   3    2   4      96
121  7    3  2    4    28   110  6    5   3    2   24     69
122  8    0  0    0    28   738  123  2   3    0   0      28
123  8    5  0    0    28   480  0    2   3    0   0      17
124  8    5  0    1    5    480  480  2   3    1   0      26
125  8    0  0    0    9    480  480  3   3    0   0      26
126  8    0  0    1    22   480  480  2   3    2   1      27
127  8    0  0    17   9    480  0    4   4    1   0      19
128  8    0  1    1    15   480  0    2   4    4   3      62
129  8    0  1    1    2    600  0    2   4    3   3      76
130  8    0  1    1    1    960  0    3   4    4   3      128
131  8    0  1    2    4    640  0    3   8    3   3      97
132  8    0  2    12   28   100  6    2   3    2   6      66
133  8    0  2    1    28   90   6    2   3    2   23     60
134  9    0  0    0    13   768  0    3   3    0   0      28
135  9    0  0    0    14   932  0    2   3    0   0      34
136  9    4  0    0    13   1080 0    3   3    0   0      40
137  9    4  0    0    14   1200 0    2   3    0   0      43
138  9    0  0    8    13   572  572  5   4    0   0      32
139  9    0  0    8    14   572  572  5   4    0   0      32
140  9    0  0    8    28   1000 1000 2   3    1   0      42
141  9    0  0    9    28   720  720  4   3    0   0      62
142  9    3  0    10   28   800  0    0   1    0   0      26
143  9    0  1    2    4    1200 0    5   8    3   3      190
144  9    0  1    2    3    1200 0    3   7    3   2      191
145  9    0  1    1    1    1580 0    5   6    4   3      229
146  9    0  1    1    15   1600 0    4   6    3   3      222
147  9    0  1    1    16   1600 0    4   6    4   3      227
148  9    0  2    3    17   92   6    3   3    2   19     84
149  9    0  2    3    18   90   6    3   3    2   7      50
150  9    0  2    3    19   88   6    3   3    2   25     39
151  10   0  0    0    20   738  0    3   3    0   0      27
152  10   8  0    0    20   320  80   3   3    0   0      13
153  10   9  0    0    20   654  130  3   3    0   0      26
154  10   0  0    0    21   738  0    3   3    0   0      27
155  10   0  0    0    22   738  738  4   3    1   0      41
156  10   8  0    0    22   320  320  4   3    1   0      18
157  10   9  0    0    22   654  654  3   3    1   0      36
158  10   0  0    0    9    738  0    5   4    0   0      29
159  10   8  0    0    9    360  0    5   4    0   0      15
160  10   9  0    0    9    654  0    5   4    0   0      28
161  10   7  0    11   28   1200 0    0   2    0   0      40
162  10   0  1    2    4    750  0    5   8    3   3      126
163  10   8  1    2    4    412  0    5   8    3   3      69
164  10   9  1    2    4    620  0    5   8    3   3      104
165  10   0  1    2    3    750  0    3   7    3   2      119
166  10   8  1    2    3    408  0    4   7    3   2      66
167  10   9  1    2    3    640  1    3   6    3   2      93
168  10   0  1    1    1    1200 0    5   6    4   3      186
169  10   8  1    1    1    960  0    5   6    4   3      149
170  10   9  1    1    1    1120 0    5   6    4   3      174
171  10   0  1    1    16   1200 0    4   6    4   3      170
172  10   8  1    1    16   960  0    4   6    4   3      136
173  10   9  1    1    16   1120 0    4   6    4   3      159
174  10   0  1    1    23   600  0    0   3    4   3      73
175  10   7  1    1    0    1200 0    2   6    4   3      163
176  10   8  1    1    0    960  0    3   6    4   3      133
177  10   0  2    2    28   210  14   3   3    2   22     182
178  10   0  2    1    28   180  12   3   3    2   26     122
179  10   0  2    4    28   176  12   3   3    2   20     145
180  10   7  2    2    28   180  12   4   3    2   21     181
181  10   7  2    1    28   180  12   3   3    2   26     122
182  10   7  2    4    28   176  12   4   3    2   7      102
183  10   0  0    17   28   640  0    6   4    1   0      28
184  10   0  0    17   22   640  0    5   4    2   0      28
185  10   0  1    17   3    800  0    5   7    3   2      140
186  10   0  1    17   15   800  0    6   7    3   3      134
187  10   0  1    17   4    800  0    7   8    3   3      139
188  10   0  1    17   4    800  0    7   8    3   3      139
189  11   0  0    0    20   793  0    3   3    0   0      29
190  11   0  0    0    9    638  638  4   4    0   0      35
191  11   0  0    0    22   532  532  3   3    1   1      30
192  11   0  0    0    21   600  600  3   4    1   0      33
193  11   7  0    10   28   720  0    1   3    0   0      25
194  11   0  1    2    4    800  0    4   8    3   3      124
195  11   0  1    2    3    810  0    3   7    3   2      129
196  11   0  1    1    1    1500 0    5   6    4   3      233
197  11   0  1    1    16   1200 0    4   7    4   3      186
198  11   0  0    17   9    640  0    6   4    0   0      28
199  11   0  0    17   22   640  0    5   3    1   1      29
200  11   0  1    17   1    640  0    5   6    4   3      99
201  11   0  1    17   16   640  0    5   7    4   3      108
202  11   0  1    17   3    480  0    4   7    3   2      78
203  11   0  1    17   27   480  0    6   8    3   3      82
204  11   0  2    2    28   135  8    2   3    2   19     109
205  11   0  2    12   28   125  8    2   3    2   24     80
206  11   3  2    4    28   125  8    3   3    2   24     82
207  12   0  0    0    28   750  150  3   3    1   0      30
208  12   0  0    13   28   800  160  3   3    1   0      32
209  12   0  0    14   28   750  150  4   4    1   0      32
210  12   0  0    1    28   750  750  4   4    2   0      44
211  12   0  0    15   28   900  225  5   4    1   0      42
212  12   0  0    16   28   750  750  4   3    2   1      44
213  12   0  0    17   28   1443 1443 6   4    2   0      93
214  12   0  1    17   24   905  0    6   8    3   3      155
215  12   0  1    17   25   905  0    5   7    3   2      158
216  12   0  1    2    3    905  0    5   7    3   2      158
217  12   0  1    1    26   905  0    5   6    4   2      149
218  12   0  1    1    1    905  0    5   6    4   3      140
219  12   0  2    2    28   120  6    3   3    2   27     84
220  12   0  2    1    28   115  6    3   3    2   28     72
221  12   0  2    4    28   110  6    4   3    2   7      51
222  13   0  0    0    28   740  0    1   3    0   0      26
223  13   0  0    11   28   600  0    0   2    0   0      20
224  13   0  0    1    28   1200 1200 2   3    1   0      64
225  13   0  0    8    28   720  0    3   4    0   0      27
226  13   0  1    2    27   615  0    4   8    3   3      95
227  13   0  1    2    3    700  0    1   6    3   2      98
228  13   0  1    1    1    700  0    2   6    3   3      93
229  13   0  1    1    0    700  0    1   6    3   3      91
230  13   0  2    2    28   116  6    2   3    2   19     82
231  13   0  2    1    28   130  8    2   3    2   29     88
232  13   0  2    4    28   110  6    2   3    2   8      38
233  14   10 0    0    28   720  120  3   3    1   0      29
234  14   10 0    0    28   600  100  2   3    0   0      23
235  14   10 0    9    28   720  720  3   3    2   0      40
236  14   10 1    2    5    480  0    3   6    3   3      70
237  14   10 1    1    3    480  0    3   5    3   2      69
238  14   10 1    1    1    480  0    3   6    4   3      72
239  15   8  0    0    28   640  0    3   3    0   0      24
240  15   8  0    1    28   800  800  3   2    1   0      43
241  15   8  1    1    1    640  0    3   5    4   3      87
242  16   1  0    0    28   650  0    3   3    1   0      25
243  16   3  0    0    28   640  0    3   3    1   0      24
244  16   10 0    0    28   672  0    3   3    1   0      26
245  16   8  0    1    28   640  640  3   2    2   0      35
246  16   10 0    1    28   672  672  4   3    2   0      38
247  16   8  0    10   28   640  0    2   3    0   0      23
248  16   4  1    1    1    480  0    5   6    4   3      74
249  16   9  1    1    1    690  0    6   6    4   3      109
250  17   3  0    0    28   776  110  3   3    1   0      31
251  17   3  0    1    28   776  776  2   3    2   0      42
252  17   3  1    1    3    594  0    3   6    3   2      87
253  17   3  2    1    28   115  6    3   3    2   28     72
254  17   3  2    4    28   110  6    3   3    2   7      50
255  18   1  0    0    28   600  0    3   3    1   0      23
256  18   1  0    1    22   540  540  3   2    2   1      29
257  18   1  1    2    3    800  0    4   6    3   3      111
258  18   1  1    1    1    800  0    5   6    4   3      124
259  18   1  2    1    28   115  8    3   3    2   28     97
260  18   1  0    17   28   700  100  5   4    2   0      33
261  18   1  1    17   27   960  0    6   8    3   2      174


20.4 Readiness Loss Table
Each time a unit changes objective, it must check on the
following table to see how many Readiness points are lost. The
leader bonus refers to the bonus of the leader listed on the
screen during the objective phase.
Leader  -2     -3    -4       Leader  -2     -3    -4
Bonus Readiness Readiness Readiness   Bonus Readiness Readiness
Readiness

0       0%     30%   70%      8       20%    50%   30%
1       0%     35%   65%      9       25%    50%   25%
2       0%     40%   60%      10      30%    50%   20%
3       0%     45%   55%      11      35%    50%   15%
4       0%     50%   50%      12      40%    50%   10%
5       5%     50%   45%      13      45%    50%   5%
6       10%    50%   40%      14      50%    50%   0%
7       15%    50%   35%      15      55%    45%   0%

20.5 Weapon/Range Casualty Table
                              Range to Target Square:

Wpn. Type      Wpn#  Abbrev.  1   2   3-4  5-6  7-8  9-12

Musket         0     MUS      3   1    0    0    0    0
Rifle          1     RFL      3   3    2    0    0    0
Carbine        2     CRB      2   0    0    0    0    0
Saber          3     SBR      1   0    0    0    0    0
12lb Gun       4     12G      17  8    6    3    2    1
9lb Gun        5     9G       13  7    4    2    1    1
8lb Gun        6     8G       12  6    4    1    1    1
6lb Gun        7     6G       9   5    3    1    1    1
4lb Gun        8     4G       7   4    2    1    1    0
3lb Gun        9     3G       5   3    1    1    0    0
2lb Gun        10    2G       3   2    1    0    0    0
24lb Howitzer  11    H24      19  7    5    2    1    0
5.5" Howitzer  12    H5.5     18  6    4    2    1    0
18lb Licorne   13    L18      16  6    3    2    1    1
10lb Howitzer  14    H10      14  5    2    1    1    0
9lb Licorne    15    L9       13  5    2    1    1    0
7lb Howitzer   16    H7       11  4    1    1    0    0
6lb Howitzer   17    H6       10  4    1    1    0    0
12lbGun/24lb How     18       12/24    18   8    6    3     2
1
12lbGun/10lb How     19       12/10    15   7    4    2     2
1
12lbGun/6lb How      20       12/613   6    4    2    1     1
12lbGun/18lb Lic     21       12/18    16   7    5    3     2
1
12lbG/6lbH/18lbLic   22       3GHL14   6    4    2    1     1
8lbGun/7lb How 23    8/7      11  5    3    2    1    1
6lbGun/10lb How      24       6/1011   5    3    1    1     1
3lbGun/6lb How       25       3/6 7    4    1    1    0     0
6lbGun/9lb Lic 26    6/9      11  5    3    1    1    1
9lbGun/5.5" How      27       9/5 15   7    4    2    1     1
6lb Gun/5.5" How     28       6/5 13   6    4    2    1     1
4lbGun/5.5" How      29       4/5 12   6    3    2    1     0

The number under the range column for each weapon type is the
number of casualties that weapon will inflict at that range per
100 men or per gun firing. These casualties are modified by the
other factors. Refer to section 20.6.

20.6 Fire and Melee Strength Modifiers

Target Location      Fire          Melee          Attacker
Formation      Fire

Clear          100%  100%          Line           100%
Town           60%   80%           Column         30%
Woods          70%   70%           Square         30%
Fields         90%   100%          Charge         0%
Stream         100%  100%          Counter Charge 0%
Bridge         100%  100%          Limbered       0%
Redoubt        20%   40%           Unlimbered     100%
Swamp          70%   70%           Normal         60%
Sunken Road    80%   90%           Routed         50%
River          0%    0%            Dismounted     75%
                                   Open           60%
Attacker Location    Fire          Melee

Clear          100%  100%          Defender Formation  Fire
Town           100%  100%
Woods          100%  100%          Line           100%
Fields         100%  100%          Column         150%
Stream         100%  70%           Square         140%
Bridge         100%  70%           Charge         100%
Redoubt        100%  100%          Counter Charge 100%
Swamp          100%  100%          Limbered       80%
Sunken Road    100%  100%          Unlimbered     40%
River          0%    0%            Normal         110%
                                   Routed         60%
                                   Dismounted     70%
                                   Open           80%

MELEE MODE TABLE

Attacker  Line      Col  Sqr  Chg  Cchg      Limb      Ulim
Norm      Rout      Dism      Open
Line      100% 80%  100% 80%  80%  80%  80%  80%  200% 100% 120%
Column    180% 100% 180% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 250% 180% 200%
Square    100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Charge    250% 250% 100% 100% 100% 300% 300% 150% 400% 250% 300%
C-Charge  250% 250% 100% 100% 100% 300% 300% 150% 400% 250% 300%
Limbered  100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Unlimb    100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Normal    100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Routed    100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Dismount  100% 80%  100% 80%  80%  80%  80%  80%  200% 100% 120%
Open      80%  70%  90%  70%  70%  70%  70%  70%  180% 80%  100%

Col = Column        Sqr = Square        Chg = Charge        Cchg
= Counter-Charge
Limb = Limbered     Ulim = Unlimbered   Norm = Cavalry Normal
Dism = Dismounted Calvary

ADDITIONAL COMBAT MODIFIERS: (All apply to both fire and melee
unless noted otherwise.)

Condition                       Modifier

Readiness level                 -5% per level below 7
Lancers Melee                   130%
Unit defending in melee is flanked 25%
Unit attacking a flank in melee 150%
Unit firing at a flank          130%
Unit meleeing is out of ammo    90%
Disruption level                -10%
Number of men in target square  +/- 1% per 50 men difference from
500 (99% at 450 men.)
Number of men in firing unit    -1% per 50 men difference from
500 (99% at 550 men)
Attacking unit has less than 6 OP points left     75%
Attacker Command Control        50% + 5% per level
Attacker Fatigue                -1/2% per point
Attacker Efficiency             Artillery or Fire Phase =
Efficiency/ 100
                                Melee or Cav Charge = Efficiency
- 18)/80
Melee Factor                    +10% per level (Melee Factor of 6
= 160%)
Leader Bonus                    +3% per bonus level of attached
leader
Target of fire has Auto CAV retreat on  10% losses
Target is in Road Mode          200% losses
Attacking Skirmishers           +1% per 5 men (to maximum of 300)
(Max of +60%)

ù Note: If attacking unit is not meleeing and is a 100% skirmisher
unit with 100% skirmishers out, modifier is +60%

Defending Skirmishers           -1% per 5 men (to maximum of 300)
(Max of -60%)

ù Note: If target unit is not meleeing and is a 100% skirmisher
unit with 100% skirmishers out, fire modifier is -60%
ù Note: If target unit is a 100% skirmisher unit with 100%
skirmishers out and is in town, or woods, attacker melee modifier
is -50%

Infantry unit firing with less than 500 men and   120%
is stacked with at least one other unit
Unit is firing at a unit that is set to melee     140%
French/French ally in column or with skirmishers out   120% for
fire combat only
Unit is a 100% skirmisher unit with 100% deployed 110%
British infantry in column or line formation 130%
French infantry in column formation     150%
Dismounted CAV melee            1/2 melee value
Russian Musketeer / Fusilier in column in melee   + 1 melee value
Austrian Grenadier with skirmishers out 120% for fire combat only
Prussian Infantry               120%
Austrian unit in column         130%
Austrian unit in column meleed by cavalry    120%
Highland infantry               120%
Russian infantry in column      120%
Random Factor                   80 to 120%
Level of Play                   80% to 120%
Artillery unit with less than 16 men per gun # men/ 16  number of
guns
Elevation                       +/- 10% per level (- if target is
higher, + if lower)
Dismounted cavalry in melee     33%
Routed unit vs. cavalry         20%
Limbered artillery in melee     20%

20.7 Rally Table
                    Morale:
Command Control     20        40        60        80

10                  40%       50%       60%       70%
15                  55%       65%       75%       85%
20                  70%       80%       90%       100%
25                  85%       95%       100%      100%
30                  100%      100%      100%      100%

The higher a unit's Morale and Command control, the higher its
chance to recover from Rout.
Russian units add 10% to the percentages on this table.


20.8 Operation Point Table

The Command Control rating of a unit determines how many OP
points the unit receives. The maximum number of OP points a unit
may receive is 15.

  Command Control   OP points        Command Control   Op points
         10             8                   20            9-11
         11             8                   21            9-11
         12             8                   22           10-12
         13             8                   23           10-12
         14             8                   24           11-13
         15             8                   25           11-13
         16             8                   26           12-14
         17             8                   27           12-14
         18            8-9                  28           13-15
         19            8-9                  29           13-15
                                            30           14-15

OP point modifier is added to the number calculated from the
above table.
Russian units with an OP point modifier of 0 receive a -1 to
their final # of OP points received.
Austrian units in column receive a -1 to their final # of OP
points received.

20.9 Fatigue Table

Action                   Cost
Fire Combat
     Infantry and Cavalry                   +4
     Artillery           +10
Melee combat             +8
Movement                 +0 or 2 *

*Whether a unit gains 0 or 2 Fatigue per square entered is
heavily dependent on the terrain type entered and the cost in OP
points to enter that square.

20.10 Efficiency Table

Action                                            Cost

Unit moved onto or adjacent to by a friendly retreating unit
-2
     and unit has between 20 and 60 efficiency
Unit retreats                                     -6
Per 5 men lost as casualties*                     -1
Unit forces an enemy unit to retreat by fire, melee or cavalry
overrun                                           +6
Unit forces an enemy unit to rout by fire or melee     +12

*For units with less than 800 men. If a unit has over 800 men,
the unit must lose a proportionally higher number of men suffer
Efficiency loss.


20.11 Disruption Table

When units suffer losses they may gain disruption levels. Units
will have a chance of gaining Disruption levels if:

     The unit suffers >3% losses in a single shot (5 men lost for
artillery)
     Morale of the Unit is <20 and unit suffers a loss
     Unit is moved onto or adjacent to by a retreating unit

If any of the above occur, then the unit takes a Disruption Test
based on the following chart. Each occurrence of the above causes
a Disruption Test to be taken.

                      Disruption Levels Gained:
  Morale           +0             +1             +2

   80+            100%            0%             0%
    60            80%            20%             0%
    40            60%            40%             0%
    20            40%            40%            20%
    0             20%            40%            40%
   -20             0%            40%            60%


Special modifiers:
     ù Units in line formation are at -20%
     ù Cossacks under Artillery fire are at -5%
     ù Units in square formation receiving a cavalry charge get a
+40% bonus
     ù Units in column formation receiving a cavalry charge get a
+10% bonus
     ù French / French ally units in column or with deployed
skirmishers get a +20% bonus
     ù British units in line or column get a +30% bonus
     ù Austrian grenadier units with skirmishers deployed get a
+20% bonus
     ù Austrian units in column get a +30% bonus
     ù Austrian units in column under attack by meleeing cavalry
get a +20% bonus
     ù Highland units get a +20% bonus
     ù Russian infantry in column get a +20% bonus
     ù Prussian infantry get a +20% bonus

Note that all modifiers are cumulative. Therefore, Austrian
grenadiers in column under attack by enemy cavalry are at +60%.
Other Special Notes:
     
     ù Charging Cavalry automatically gain 2 Disruption levels,
     in addition to any gained from fire or melee combat
     ù Infantry units not in square formation and attacked by
     charging cavalry automatically gain 2 Disruption levels
     ù Units suffering >14% losses in one shot automatically gain
     5 Disruption levels (exc: Artillery)

20.12 Disruption Recovery Table

Recovery from Disruption effects is based on Command Control. A
unit may lose Disruption levels if it is not routed. The
percentages listed below are the chance of recovering the number
of Disruption levels listed if at the appropriate Command Control
level. Therefore, a unit with a Command Control of 16 would have
a 20% chance of recovering 0 Disruption levels, a 75% chance of
recovering 1 Disruption level, and a 5% chance of recovering 2
Disruption levels.

Command        Disruption Command            Disruption
Control  -0   -1   -2     Control      -0   -1   -2
10      50%  50%   0%        20        0%  75%  25%
11      45%  55%   0%        21        0%  70%  30%
12      40%  60%   0%        22        0%  65%  35%
13      35%  65%   0%        23        0%  60%  40%
14      30%  70%   0%        24        0%  55%  45%
15      25%  75%   0%        25        0%  50%  50%
16      20%  75%   5%        26        0%  45%  55%
17      15%  75%  10%        27        0%  40%  60%
18      10%  75%  15%        28        0%  35%  65%
19       5%  75%  20%        29        0%  30%  70%
                             30        0%  25%  75%

20.13 Leader Command Control Modifier Table

Leader Bonus   ****      ***       **        *
0              0%        0%        0%        100%
1              0%        0%        12%       88%
2              0%        0%        23%       77%
3              0%        0%        34%       66%
4              0%        0%        45%       55%
5              0%        0%        55%       45%
6              0%        12%       55%       34%
7              0%        22%       55%       23%
8              0%        33%       55%       12%
9              0%        45%       55%       0%
10             0%        55%       45%       0%
11             11%       55%       34%       0%
12             22%       55%       23%       0%
13             33%       55%       12%       0%
14             45%       55%       0%        0%
15             55%       45%       0%        0%

The Morale of the unit attached to the leader also affects the
above percentages.

20.14 Cavalry Charge Table

In order to charge, a cavalry unit must:

     ù have 6 OP points after declaring the charge ù have a morale
     of >24
     ù be in charge mode            ù have less than 4 disruption
     levels
     ù not start the charge in an enemy ZOC   ù pass a morale test
     (see below)
     ù choose a target within 8 squares
     
     
MORALE TEST

          Disruption:
Morale    0         1         2         3
30        40%       25%       10%       0%
40        50%       35%       20%       5%
50        60%       45%       30%       15%
60        70%       55%       40%       25%
70        100%      65%       50%       35%
80        100%      75%       60%       45%
90        100%      85%       70%       55%
Note that counter charges use the same morale chart and are under
the same restrictions as the charges. Also, the above percentages
are able to be changed in the editor.

ENTERING SQUARE
Infantry units that try to enter square during an enemy charge
will do so according to the following chart:
          Disruption:
Morale    0         1         2         3
20-39     30%       15%       0%        0%
40-59     60%       45%       30%       15%
60-79     90%       75%       60%       45%
80+       100%      100%      90%       75%

Units with greater than 3 levels of disruption or that have a
morale of less than 20 may not attempt to enter square.
Units in line formation have a -10% to the above chart.
Infantry that are comprised entirely of skirmishers have the
following modifiers:
     ù 100% skirmisher out -- cannot enter square
     ù 75% skirmishers out -- -30%
     ù 50% skirmisher out -- -20%
     ù 25% skirmishers out -- -10%
     
Units that fail to enter square will test on the following chart
to see if they gain disruption levels:

Morale    +1 Disr   +2 Disr   +3 Disr   +4 Disr   +5 Disr
20-39     10%       10%       10%       20%       50%
40-59     20%       10%       10%       20%       40%
60-79     30%       10%       10%       20%       30%
80+       40%       10%       10%       20%       20%

Units with morale of lower than 20 automatically gain 5 levels of
disruption if they are charged by cavalry.

20.15 OP Point Cost Table

Terrain Entered     Infantry  Cavalry   Artillery
Clear               2(3)      1(2)      2(3)
Town                4(6)      3(5)      3(5)
Woods               4(6)      3(5)      6(9)
Fields              2(3)      1(2)      3(5)
Stream              4(6)      3(5)      5(7)
Bridge              4(6)      3(5)      5(7)
Redoubt             3(5)      2(3)      3(5)
Swamp               4(6)      P(P)      P(P)
Sunken Road         3(5)      2(3)      3(5)
River               P(P)      P(P)      P(P)
Higher Elevation    +2        +1        +4


ADDITIONAL COST

Action                        Infantry  Cavalry   Artillery
Performed

Change Facing without entering a new square       +1   +1   +1
Change facing while entering a new square         +1** +0   +0
Change Formation if not in ZOC          +2*       +2*  +2
Change Formation if in ZOC    +6*       +6*       +6
Enter an enemy ZOC            +1        +1        +1
Leave an enemy ZOC            +2        +2        +2
Move away from objective      +1-3      +1-3      +1-3
Fire in Fire Phase            1         1         4
Melee in Melee Phase          2         2         2
Deploy/Recall Skirmishers     1         1         1
Stack with a friendly unit    +1        +1        +1
Change Road Mode status       2         2         2

Units in line formation pay double the listed cost, except for
units which are comprised entirely of skirmishers and which are
100% skirmishers out.

Horse artillery move as if they are cavalry.

The cost listed in parentheses is the cost for moving diagonally
while the cost listed to the first is the cost for entering a
square orthagonally (moving non-diagonally).

Units that move non-diagonally from road/town squares to
road/town squares while in road mode may do so at a cost of 1 OP
point per square.

Units may also use a special one-square movement known as ZOC-to-
ZOC movement. This entails moving from one square of an enemy ZOC
to another square of an enemy ZOC by moving through a friendly
unit. The moving unit must pay the cost to leave a ZOC, plus the
cost to enter a ZOC, plus the cost of entering the target square.
In addition, the square being entered must be occupied by a
friendly unit.

Units may always move at least one square. This requires all of a
unit's OP points and the unit must have started with at least 1
OP point.
*Non-French pay one additional point.

**Units in column are exempted from this.


                           CREDITS

                              

                         Game Design
                        Chuck Kroegel
                              
                      Game Programming
                        David Landrey
                              
                      Game Development
Chuck Kroegel, David Landrey, Joel Billings & Graeme Bayless
                              
                            Rules
               Graeme Bayless & Victor Penman
                              
                    Historical Scenarios
         Dick Vohlers, Joel Billings & Chuck Kroegel
                              
          Customized Disk Operation System (Apple)
                      Roland Gustafsson
                              
                         Playtesters
Graeme Bayless, Joel Billings, James Kucera, Dave Shelley, Robert
Daly, John Bruning, David Heath, Richard Hooks, Mike Musser,
                        Gunter Meyer,
            Bill Barr, Russ Smith & Cyrus Harris
                              
                 Special Historical Research
                         Mike Musser
                              
                  Special Historical Notes
                        John Bruning
                              
                    Art & Graphic Design
    Louis Saekow Design: David Boudreau & Peter Gascoyne
                              
                     Desktop Publishing
               David Boudreau & Peter Gascoyne
                              
                          Printing
              A & a Printers and Lithographers

            (c) 1988 Strategic Simulations, Inc.
