               SUSPENDED Part One

 "Suspended" is an excellent game and possibly the most advanced
game to date for the adventurer. The story is quite simple:  You
are the failsafe device to protect the surface world of Contra
should any emergency develop that would cause the planet control
devices to fail (these are underground in a complex where you
live suspended in a cryogenic tube, awaiting a disaster).  Of
course, a disaster develops as soon as you boot up the disk. You
are awakened to find that there has been an earthquake that has
damaged the cables in the Primary and Secondary Channels. You
have six different robots at your command.  These robots all
enjoy different skills and abilities.  Each one represents a
different sense. Iris:  The sense of sight Waldo: The sense of
touch and dexterity Sensa: Perceives things magnetic and
electronic Poet:  Perceives things electronic and can diagnose
electrical flows Whiz:  Commands the computer and can do errands
Auda:  The sense of hearing The trick to winning "Suspended" is
assigning the right task to the right robot.  Also, the right
robot has to be at the right place at the right time. This is
called critical path planning, and is the secret of "Suspended."
In the standard game, there are a few real-time events to be
aware of:  1) At the 15th cycle, there is another earthquake
which causes an acid spill that kills, in short order, any robot
that thereafter passes through the Cavernous Room (until the acid
is shut off); 2) At the 75th cycle, there is another quake which
wrecks the hydroponics and transit equipment on the surface
above. These have to be fixed quickly or the game ends swiftly
due to the starving populous above; 3) At the 100th cycle, humans
enter the complex with the intent of turning you off because, by
this time, you are clearly screwing up the assignment.  These
humans can be the death of you or they can help you by...well, I
won't tell you yet. The following commands get you through the
game in less than 70 moves.  As a result, they give little aid in
the event that you finish the game in more than that time.  The
game changes considerably after the 75th move.  There are many
problems that surface after that time, and these clues do nothing
to help you.   Let's get started! #1 POET,GO TO WEATHER CONTROL
#2 SENSA,GO TO SUB SUPPLY ROOM #3 WHIZ,GO TO SECONDARY CHANNEL #4
SENSA,TAKE RAMP #5 SENSA,GO WEST #6 SENSA,TAKE CONTAINER AND
GRASPER #7 SENSA,GO TO HALLWAY JUNCTION #8 WALDO,GO TO HALLWAY
JUNCTION #9 AUDA,GO TO GAMMA REPAIR The above moves set the game
up. Poet is needed to turn the weather control off; this
minimizes deaths at the surface (your primary goal).  Sensa gets
the ramp that is needed to allow the robots to go from one level
to another.  Auda is sent to the Gamma Repair area because she
will be needed later and, without the humans coming for a while,
there is nothing that can be done with her anyway.  Waldo is sent
to the Hallway Junction to meet Sensa and take the container and
grasper on his way to fixing Iris who is reported to be out of
order.

                 SUSPENDED Part Two

Now, enter your second set of commands: #10 POET,TURN SECOND
DIAL TO 100 #11 POET,GO TO HALLWAY END #12 IRIS,GO TO MAIN SUPPLY
ROOM #13 SENSA,PUT RAMP AT DROPOFF #14 AUDA, LISTEN #15
WALDO,TAKE CONTAINER AND GRASPER  #16 WALDO,GO TO MAIN SUPPLY #17
WALDO,INSTALL GRASPER #18 WALDO,TAKE RED IC AND YELLOW IC #19
SENSA,GO NORTH #20 SENSA,TAKE RAMP Once Poet got to the Weather
Control, he had to reset the faulty control to 100.  This is only
a temporary fix because if you let the game go on too long, all
hell will break loose with various disasters and accidents
occuring which you will not be able to control.  Poet is then
sent to the Hallway End where he will be used to get the TV
camera needed later.  Iris is sent to the Main Supply Room where
she can be fixed when Waldo arrives.  She will also help Waldo
repair the machine there.  Sensa, upon arriving, puts the ramp in
place so that Auda can get to Gamma Repair and so that she and
Poet can get to the other level.  Waldo is handed the grasper and
container which he installs.  This is done now to save moves
later. #21 SENSA,GO TO SMALL SUPPLY #22 WALDO,OPEN PANEL #23
WALDO,REPLACE ROUGH DEVICE WITH ROUGH OBJECT #24 WALDO,CLOSE
PANEL #25 POET,GET IN CAR #26 POET,GET OUT OF CAR #27 POET,GO TO
BIOLOGY LAB #28 WALDO,TAKE BURNED AND FRIED CHIP #29 POET,TAKE
CAMERA #30 SENSA,PUT RAMP AT HOLDER This stage sets the robots to
their major gathering tasks. Waldo has fixed Iris, and is now set
on fixing the machine and salvaging its parts.  Poet has arrived
at the Hallway End, gotten in the car, exited the car, and is now
getting the camera.  Sensa has arrived at the Small Supply Room
to take the cable cutter. #31 SENSA,GET ON RAMP #32 SENSA,TAKE
CUTTER #33 SENSA,GET OFF RAMP #34 SENSA,TAKE RAMP #35 SENSA,GO TO
SLOPING CORRIDOR #36 POET,GO TO VEHICLE DEBARKATION #37 WALDO,PUT
RED IC IN RED SOCKET #38 WALDO,PUT YELLOW IC IN YELLOW SOCKET #39
POET,GET IN CAR #40 POET,GET OUT OF CAR Sensa has completed her
task of getting the metal tool that she will need shortly.  Poet
has gotten the camera and is now coming back, and Waldo is in the
midst of fixing and salvaging the machine with Iris in the Main
Supply Room.

                 SUSPENDED Part Three

 You're more than half-way to your goal!  Now, enter: #41 POET,GO
TO PRIMARY CHANNEL #42 SENSA,PUT RAMP AT DROPOFF #43 GO TO GAMMA
REPAIR #44 WALDO,PUSH BUTTON #45 IRIS,TAKE FUSE #46 WALDO,TAKE
CABLE #47 WALDO,GO TO THE SECONDARY CHANNEL #48 IRIS,GO TO MIDDLE
SUPPLY #49 IRIS,TAKE CABLE #50 IRIS,GO TO MAIN SUPPLY Poet has
been sent to use the camera in the Primary Channel (this is a
Kamikaze mission because he has to pass through the Cavernous
Room to get there).  Sensa has gotten to the Sloping Corridor and
reinstalled the ramp so that she and Poet can get to the lower
level. Waldo and Iris have gotten the machine fixed and salvaged
one of the two needed cables to set the FCS in balance.  Waldo is
now set on his mission where Whiz will be waiting to install the
cable needed in the Secondary Channel. #51 SENSA,EXAMINE OBJECT
#52 SENSA,TURN FLOWSWITCH #53 BOTH SENSA AND AUDA,MOVE FRED #54
SENSA,CUT CABLE WITH CUTTER #55 POET,PLUG TV1 IN #56 POET,AIM TV1
AT SIGN (This is the important "Reset Code."  Write it down!
It's different for every game.) #57 SENSA,TAKE CABLE #58 SENSA,GO
TO PRIMARY CHANNEL #59 IRIS,PUT CABLE IN MACHINE #60 IRIS,PUT
FUSE IN MACHINE Sensa and Auda salvaged the remaining needed
cable to fix the cable in the Primary Channel.  Sensa is now on
her way.  Poet valiantly died trying to work the camera in the
Primary Channel after having had corrosive acid spilled on him.
Iris has fixed the reset machine which is now only awaiting the
installation of the cables in the FCS to reset the systems to set
the surface world above right. #61 WHIZ,GO TO WALDO #62 WHIZ,TAKE
FOURTEEN-INCH CABLE #63 WHIZ,REPLACE THE NINE-INCH CABLE WITH THE
FOURTEEN-INCH CABLE #64 WHIZ,DRAG WALDO TO THE EAST END #65
AUDA,GO TO SLEEP CHAMBER #66 SENSA,REPLACE FOUR-INCH CABLE WITH
TWELVE-INCH CABLE #67 IRIS,PRESS ----- CIRCLE #68 IRIS,PRESS
----- CIRCLE At this point, the game is over. Only 8,000 are dead
and you have succeeded in your mission.  It should be noted that
this does not answer all the questions and puzzles that are
presented in the game, it just tells you how to win the game in
the shortest order.  Enjoy!
